dates: ['1970-11-12', '2007-11-15', '2009-05-25']
datePublished: 2011-05-11 00:00:00
Date Published:2011-05-11 00:00:00 This cyclone shelter in Chhotobaishdia union in Galachipa upazila of Patuakhali is one of dozens of such centres in the district that have remained virtually useless for years due to lack of renovation.Photo: STAR A large number of people in coastal district Patuakhali are highly vulnerable to natural disasters, especially during May to November every year, as the cyclone shelters in the district can accommodate only seven lakh of the 17 lakh people. Over 200 chars (coastal islands) in 15 unions of three upazilas in Patuakhali district are most vulnerable to natural disasters like cyclones, floods and tidal surges while all the seven upazilas of the district are more or less affected, especially during serious disasters. After devastating tidal surges accompanied by the cyclone on November 12 in 1970 claimed lives of over one lakh people in Patuakhali district alone, 204 cyclone shelters cum educational institutions were built in the district. But 90 of the shelters later became useless for want of renovation. Of the useless cyclone shelters, 63 are in Galachipa, 16 in Kalapara, eight in Mirzaganj and three in Dashmina upazilas, sources of District Relief and Rehabilitation Office (DRRO) said, adding that several letters were sent to the higher authority to take step for their renovation but in vain. Super cyclones Sidr and Aila that hit the coastal areas on November 15 in 2007 and on May 25 in 2009 respectively claimed many lives in the district, as people did not take shelter during the disasters. After the disasters, the government built 83 cyclone shelters in seven upazilas of the district at a cost of about Tk 100 crore. Now over seven lakh people can take shelter during disasters while the remaining 10 lakh people in the district are still under disaster risk, DRRO sources said. "We pass days amid anxiety of disaster from May to November every year due to lack of sufficient cyclone shelters here," said Abdul Haque, a resident of Arojbagey villager in Dashmina upazila, who lost all 12 members of his family during the tidal surge in 1970. Siddiqur Rahman of Char Montaz in Galachipa upazila said the government should build sufficient cyclone shelters in the district especially in the coastal island areas so that people can save their lives during disaster. @#

---------------

dates: ['2018-09-03']
datePublished: 2018-11-01 00:00:00
Date Published:2018-11-01 00:00:00 Tk1.79cr distributed among erosion victims The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs on Wednesday approved a proposal to protect Zajira and Naria upazilas of Shariatpur district from river erosion at a cost of Tk1,077.58 crore. The committee at a meeting, with Finance Minister AMA Muhith in the chair, gave the go-ahead to the proposal placed by Water Resources Ministry, official sources said, reports BSS. Under the proposal, the contract will be handed over to Bangladesh Navy-run Khulna Shipyard for implementation of the project to protect 8.90km of riverbank in the upazilas, that includes dredging and construction of ferry terminals. The approval came at a time when thousands have been rendered homeless by the scourge of the Padma in the two upazilas over the past three months. The government has so far distributed nearly Tk1.79 crore in cash and 5,952 bundles of corrugated Iron (CI) sheets among 5,081 families affected by the Padma erosion in the district this year. Earlier, the Disaster Management and Relief Ministry allocated Taka 1,81,50,000 for the district as house building grants along with 6,050 bundles of CI sheet. Under the scheme each erosion affected family will get cash Tk3000 along with a bundle of CI sheet. Additionally, the government has distributed 675 tons of rice and Tk52 lakh in cash as gratuitous relief (GR) among the river erosion victims of Noria, Zajira, and Bhedorganj upazilas of the district in the current year, said officials. Disaster Management and Relief (DM&R) Minister, Mofazzal Hossen Chowdhury Maya, while visiting Naria upazila on September 18, said, "The government under Vulnerable Group Feeding (VGF) program will distribute rice among 5,081 erosion affected families till December 31." Project Implementation Officer (PIO) of the Disaster Management and Relief Ministry of Zajira upazila, Shawpan Matubbar, said that in Naria, the government has distributed 5,000 bundles of CI sheet and Tk1.50 crore as house building assistance among 5,000 erosion victim families. Apart from this, the government has distributed 609.72 tons of VGF rice among the erosion affected families,where each family will get 30 kg of rice in a month till December, along with 14,000 packets of dry food, said the official. Meanwhile, the government has allocated a total of 18,000 packets of dry food for erosion affected poor families,each packet containing five kg of rice, one kg pulses, one kg sugar, one kg flattened rice, 500 grams of puffed rice, 1-kg edible oil, and a box of matches. A vast area with about 200 buildings, including hospitals, clinics, mosques, temples, and business houses in Naria, has been eroded as the mighty Padma continues to devour its right bank in the district, leaving hundreds of people homeless. River erosion in Naria and Zajira upazilas of the district has been occurring in the rainy season for the last several years. But this time, erosion by the Padma has taken a serious turn. The locals said over 20 square kilometres of land in Naria have been eroded in the last three years. This year the erosion began some two and a half months ago, but the severe erosion began on September 3 and it is still continuing, they added. @#

---------------

dates: ['2017-08-15']
datePublished: 2017-09-13 00:00:00
Date Published:2017-09-13 00:00:00 Govt aid helping farmers to recover in flood-affected districts Md Taiyeb Ali Sarker, Nilphamari , Mahadi Al Hasnat , Mahadi Al Hasnat Published at 06:10 pm September 13th, 2017 Last updated at 12:56 am September 14th, 2017 Government support is helping thousands of farmers affected by last month's monsoon floods in the northern and northeastern districts of Bangladesh to restart cultivating the land. The government has already initiated a rehabilitation programme worth over Tk90 lakh for across the flood-hit districts, while an incentive programme worth Tk58.7 crore is under process to help the farmers, the Department of Agricultural Extension (DAE) said. At least 104,949 hectares of cropland were completely devastated by the floods in August while 498,660 hectares of cropland were partially damaged, pushing the farmers on to the breadline. The farmers, however, have returned and already started cultivating for next season with support from governmental and non-governmental organisations, local sources said. Motiar Rahman, a farmer from Auliapur village under Sadar Upazila in Dinajpur district, said he had sown paddy plantlets on his land using expensive seedbeds. "The production cost will increase as the cost of agricultural labour, fertiliser and pesticides have all increased," he said. According to the Dinajpur DAE, a target of 253,687 hectares of land has been set in the current season while officials claimed the target of this year will not be hindered despite the floods. A total of 25,456 hectares of land of Aman rice saplings in 13 upazilas of Dinajpur were submerged by floodwater while around 157,000 farmers have been affected by the floods in the district, the officials said. Dinajpur DAE Deputy Director Golam Mostafa said the government has provided seedbeds to farmers and there was no cropland left uncultivated. "19,000 farmers in the district have been given incentive support while fertilisers and seeds of wheat, maize, mustard and lentil are being given for free for next season's cultivation," he told the Dhaka Tribune. Also Read- Little relief for flood-hit people The partially affected farmers, however, have demanded the continuation of government assistance until the upcoming harvest. Nilphamari district's Deputy Commissioner Md Khaled Rahim said the authority has already provided Binashail paddy sapling (a variety of Aman) to farmers with the assistance of Bangladesh Agricultural Development Corporation (BADC). "The farm managers in each upazila have set examples by providing Aman saplings in their own farms," he said. Similar initiatives have been undertaken in other flood-hit districts across the country. Creating seedbeds, the DAE has distributed paddy saplings among 7,780 cultivators in different districts while 1,120 farmers were each given 5kg of paddy seeds (Aman) in seven districts. The DAE has also created 1,064 floating seedbeds from which saplings were distributed among 355 cultivators, the officials said. "The government has taken the initiative to provide seeds and fertilisers among 541,201 cultivators for the winter season," DAE Field Service Wing Additional Director Alhaz Uddin Ahmed told the Dhaka Tribune. "Around 600,000 farmers in Haor region will be given seeds and fertilisers and Tk1,000 each to cultivate Boro paddy. Another proposal of Tk20 crore is underway to help flood-hit farmers across the country." @#

---------------

dates: ['2017-09-10']
datePublished: 2017-10-10 00:00:00
Date Published:2017-10-10 00:00:00 Many flood victims still live on top of embankments Mahadi Al Hasnat , Mahadi Al Hasnat Published at 04:13 pm October 10th, 2017 Last updated at 04:15 pm October 10th, 2017 Although the flood water receded over a month ago, a large number of victims whose homes were ravaged are still living without a roof over their heads on the river banks. They are yet to receive government support to rebuild their homes. Several hundreds of displaced people from Dighapara, Nayapara, Sherpur Haat, Koromjapara, Chakratinath and Shimulbari were found living in makeshift houses on the Dighapara embankment adjacent to the Brahmaputra River in Bogra. Local sources said a number of these people took shelter on this embankment years ago, while more than a thousand newly displaced people also arrived after their homes were destroyed by the latest flood, Sherpur Haat's Union Panel Chairman Md Ifaz Uddin told the Dhaka Tribune: "Around 600-700 families from up to seven villages of the union have been gravely affected by the flood. Many of these families could not return to their houses which are under water. "The support provided by the government is inadequate to fulfill the victims' needs. We have distributed 80-90 bundles of tin among the flood victims, but it was not enough to help them all." Many victims alleged that they have been neglected by the government in terms of relief, humanitarian aid and financial support to reduce their plight and rebuild houses. Md Bablu Molla, a local farmer from Kutubpur Union under Sariakandi upazila told the Dhaka Tribune: "The river has engulfed five bighas of cropland including my home during the flood. We had to take refuge on the embankment. All we received was 10kg of rice as relief in mid-September. We heard the government would provide relief and financial support to flood victims, but we are yet to receive a single sheet of tin to build a house," Another victim Abdul Mazid, lost 10-15 bighas of land due to river erosion and is currently living in a temporary residence on the embankment. He said: "Hundreds of farmers like me have lost everything and currently live in dire conditions. We have no option but to depend on the government's support." Government officials claim that the aid distribution process is still underway. However, the local public administration stated that the relief which will be provided will not match the demands. According to a Department of Disaster Management (DDM) report, at least 150 people have died in the devastating monsoon floods across the country. 79,692,860 people were severely affected and a total of 737,577 homes were completely or partially destroyed in more than 30 flood-hit districts. During the flood, a total of 104,949 hectares of croplands have been completely ravaged while another 498,660 hectares were partially damaged in northern and east-northern districts of Bangladesh. Sources at the DDM said that the Department of Agricultural Extension has been working closely with the DDM in order to minimise the loss by providing seeds, seedlings and fertilisers among the affected cultivators. DDM authorities are also continuing relief distribution among the victims. The government has allotted a total of 27,207 metric tonnes of rice for 32 flood-hit districts. 17,721 metric tonnes of rice has already been distributed. The government has also allotted a total of Tk89,155,000 in cash for the victims. Tk56,779,227 has already been handed out. While asked about the displaced people who are currently living on embankments or under the open sky, DDM Director General Md Reaz Ahmed said they are providing financial support and tin bundles so they can rebuild or repair their homes. @#

---------------

dates: ['2019-07-01', None, None, None]
datePublished: 2019-07-29 00:00:00
Date Published:2019-07-29 00:00:00      
Fair price has brought smile to vegetable farmers in flood free areas of Sadar, Nageshwari, Bhurungamari and Rajarhat upazilas. They grow different types of vegetables like pointed gourd, pumpkin, aubergine and bottle gourd in Kharif-1 (March-July) season, said Bimal Kumar De, sub-assistant agricultural officer of Department of Agricultural Extension (DAE) in Kurigram. Nine upazilas in the district have been affected by flood early this month and the floodwater started receding from the areas in the last couple of days. But the growers in eight unions of the four upazilas still continued harvesting the vegetables as floodwater could not enter their fields situated in highland areas. The agricultural officer said around 4,038 hectares of land in the district have been brought under vegetable cultivation this year. As the flood has affected 3,739 hectares out of 4,038 hectares of fields, vegetable prices have shot up, he said.  Saidur Rahman of Kaley village in Belgachha union of Sadar upazila said "I have been cultivating vegetable in Kharif-1 season for the last four years and earning good profit." He has cultivated pointed gourd on 12 decimals of land spending Tk 6,000 this year, said the farmer. "I've already sold pointed gourds at Tk 10,000," said Saidur, adding that he is expecting to earn Tk 16,000 more from sale of the vegetable. Grower Rezaul Islam of Sanwashi village in Halokhana union under Sadar upazila said he cultivated aubergine on 10 decimals of land and pointed gourd on 22 decimals of land this season. "I have already sold the vegetables at Tk 31,000. I'm also expecting to earn Tk 43,000 more in the next two months," said Rezaul. They are getting good profits from the vegetable farming this season every year, he said. Another farmer Akbar Ali of Chhinaye Haat village in Chhinaye union of Rajarhat upazila said he cultivated aubergine on 40 decimals of land and pumpkin on 16 decimals of land spending Tk 19,000 in May this year. "I'm expecting to earn Tk 42,000 from sale of the vegetables in the next two months," he said. Kurigram DAE Additional Deputy Director (Plant Protection) Sasty Chandra Roy said there are many vegetable growers in Rajarhat and Sadar upazilas and they are known as adapted farmers, who cultivate different types of vegetables during this period of the year, and get a good profit. In the rainy season, extra care is needed for pollination, he said.

---------------

dates: ['2019-07-03']
datePublished: 2019-07-13 00:00:00
Date Published:2019-07-13 00:00:00 Flood situation has deteriorated in 10 districts in the north, north-east and hill regions amid continued downpour in the country as well as neighbouring India. At least three children drowned yesterday including two Rohingya boys in Cox's Bazar. Thousands of people remain stranded in the flood affected districts, as road communications have been snapped by flood water. The Flood Forecasting and Warning Centre said the worst was yet to come as rivers would swell even further, inundating new areas. In Lalmonirhat's Hatibandha, the authorities started using loudspeakers late last night to order thousands of villagers near the Teesta barrage to evacuate immediately. Officials said the water has risen 86cm over the safe level. "Rescue teams of firefighters, police, and volunteers have been alerted. They are ready," Upazila Nirbahi Officer Samiul Amin told reporters. In a Ukhia refugee camp, police found the bodies of Anwar Sadque, 7, and his younger brother Anowar Faisal, 6, on Thursday night after they were washed away in a flash flood. In Chattogram's Fatikchhari, Imam Hossain, 12, drowned in flood water yesterday morning. Around two lakh people of 30 villages in Fatikchhari have been suffering due to the flash floods. Other affected districts are Lalmonirhat, Gaibandha, Bogura, Sylhet, Sunamganj, Netrokona, Bandarban, and Nilphamari. "The met office has forecast heavy rains over the next few days. It could worsen the flood situation," State Minister for Disaster Management and Relief Enamur Rahman said. The authorities have flagged 628 points in different rivers as risky. Of them, 26 were marked very risky. In Lalmonirhat, new areas were flooded yesterday. Around 50,000 people in 60 villages have been stranded as the Teesta and Dharla rivers swelled. Mozahar Ali, 56, a resident of Gobordhan area of near the Teesta in Aditmari, said villagers have been facing an acute shortage of drinking water as tube-wells in the area have gone under water. "We have been surviving on chira, muri, sugar, bread and biscuits as cooking is impossible in flooded stoves and kitchens. In Kurigram, people in almost 250 char areas in Sadar, Ulipur, Chilmari, Rowmari and Rajibpur upazilas have been severely affected. Flood water in Sunamganj and Sylhet have risen as the Surma and Kushiyara rivers are overflowing. In Sunamganj, 13,100 families of five upazilas are seriously affected, officials said. In Sylhet, water level in the Sari-Gowain river began to fall yesterday, giving hope to thousands of affected people. In Netrakona's Kalmakanda upazila, vast new areas were flooded yesterday, officials said. Over 10,000 families have been seriously affected while farmed fish from 5,000 ponds were washed away. In Bandarban, around 1,000 families have been stranded as road communication to the areas remain snapped. Chattogram-Bandarban and Bandarban -Rangamati highways have been blocked by floodwater for three days. In Rangamati, about 20 villages of Baghaichari have been submerged. Flash flood has damaged crops on around 100 hectares in the upazila. Officials said the flooding was caused mostly by heavy downpour. @#

---------------

dates: ['1970', None, None, '1976-06-01', None, None, None, '1977-04-01', None, None, None, None]
datePublished: 1988-09-07T05:00:00.000Z
High Ground Is a Stranger In Bangladesh
1988-09-07T05:00:00.000Z
Bangladesh is a nation seemingly founded on unstable footing.
Its very ground is, by and large, a swarm of islands created and washed away each year as the waggling, monsoon-swollen Ganges and Brahmaputra Rivers reach across its vast delta and tumble into the Bay of Bengal.
Its politics are no more predictable. Two presidents have been assassinated in its 17-year history, and Bangladesh has suffered waves of man-made terror. Terrible natural disasters are too frequent in this nation of 55,126 square miles, about the size of Wisconsin, which is bordered by India and Burma at the bend in the Bay of Bengal.
The majority of its population of more than 100 million is crammed onto the islands, most no more than 10 feet above sea level, that speckle the delta. When disaster strikes, there is no high ground upon which to seek refuge. Tidal Waves and Heavy Rains
In 1970, a tidal wave killed 300,000 people. In June 1976, heavy rains swept away the homes of 300,000 people and killed at least 143. In April 1977, waves created by a cyclone in the Indian Ocean killed 600 people. In 1980, flooding forced the evacuation of 500,000 people. In 1985, a cyclone killed at least 1,400 and perhaps as many as 10,000.
Ainslie Embree, a South Asia specialist at Columbia University, said, ''Man-made disasters are just as consequent as the natural disasters.''
Ever since the 12th century, when Moslem invaders brought Islam to Bengal, which encompasses Bangladesh and eastern India, there has been religious strife with Hindus. Most Bangladeshis are Moslem, with Hindus making up 14 percent of the population. The Moslem rulers were forced out by the British in the 18th century.
In 1947, predominantly Hindu India won independence from Britain and a separate Moslem state, Pakistan, was created in two parts, divided by 1,000 miles of Indian territory. The partition evoked ages-old religious enmity, and massacres ensued. Power Centered in West
Power in the new Moslem nation was centered in West Pakistan, and by 1968, rioters in the more populous East were demanding autonomy. By 1970, separatists from the East had won a majority in the National Assembly and were pressing for more power. But Assembly sessions were postponed by Agha Yahya Khan, then President, and full-scale civil war erupted. ''Bangladesh suffered greatly during the civil war,'' Dr. Embree said. ''A great many of the intellectuals were killed.''
Dr. Embree said the Pakistani Army killed 100,000 Bangladeshis. With Indian troops invading in support of the separatists, independence was won in December 1971. Then, thousands of Pakistani collaborators were slaughtered.
One of the nation's continuing tragedies is the presence on its soil of more than a million people from Bihar State in India. These people, who do not speak Bengali, have remained in refugee camps since independence. ''They want to go to Pakistan, but the Pakistanis won't take them,'' Dr. Embree said. ''They are among the more miserable refugees in the world.'' Demonstrations in November
''While these people are Moslems, they are regarded as foreigners because they don't speak Bengali,'' he said. ''They also supported the Pakistan Government, and so they are regarded as traitors.''
After the nation gained independence, much of its Hindu population fled to India. ''India claims there were 10 million of them,'' Dr. Embree said.
Since independence, two presidents have been assassinated, the founder of the nation, Mujibur Rahman, in 1975, and Ziaur Rahman, in 1981.
Last November, there were major demonstrations against the Government of President H. M. Ershad, who took power in a military coup in March 1982. General Ershad ended martial law in 1986, retired from the army and successfully ran for election.
''The riots in November just about disrupted the economy completely,'' said Craig Baxter, a professor of South Asian history at Juniata College in Huntingdon, Pa. ''There were strikes, transportation breakdowns, a failure to fulfill international contracts.'' Two Opposition Leaders
The demonstrations were led by two principal opposition leaders, Sheik Hasina, the daughter of Mujibur Rahman, and Begum Khaleda Zia, the widow of Ziaur Rahman. President Ershad was re-elected this year after a campaign in which the opposition leaders refused to take part, saying the elections could not be fair.
As it has been since its birth, Bangladesh remains one of the poorest countries in the world, primarily because its economy is based on agriculture. ''Most people live at an agricultural subsistence level,'' Dr. Embree said.
''Very little industry has been developed,'' he continued, ''and they have very few exports.'' Jute, which is used to make rope and burlap, is Bangladesh's main export. ''But the world market for jute disappeared in recent years because of plastics and man-made fibers,'' Dr. Embree said.
Of necessity, the people have developed a remarkable style of life, trying to adapt to the water that annually sweeps through the country with the monsoon. Many Bangladeshis live in homes built on earthen platforms of four yards or higher and sow varieties of rice that will grow in deep water.

---------------

dates: [None, None, '1988-08-01', None]
datePublished: 1988-09-18T05:00:00.000Z
NEWS SUMMARY
1988-09-18T05:00:00.000Z
INTERNATIONAL/3-22
A military coup in Haiti ousted Lt. Gen. Henri Namphy, the country's ruler. The government reported the ouster several hours after shooting broke out at the plaza in front of the presidential palace. Page 1
The first serious Palestinian split of the nine-month-old uprising in Israel has been caused by an Islamic fundamentalist group promoting uncompromising war and challenging the protest's clandestine ''unified leadership.'' 1
Kurdish Iraq has been leveled by Iraqi attacks that have reduced scores of villages to patches of stone and cinderblock rubble and that have vacated others across a 120-mile stretch of the country's far north. 1
Problems in proving gas poisoning after the supposed victims have left the attack scene have been underscored by the reluctance of several physicians to diagnose chemical warfare poisoning among Kurds. 14
Chile's Oct. 5 presidential plebiscite is to be attended by several hundred political figures who plan to observe the voting over the objections of the Government of Gen. Augusto Pinochet. 6
Flooding in Bangladesh last month has left an estimated third of the capital's five million people without regular water supplies. Hundreds of thousands of people are dependent on water brought from outside. 18
An opposition front in India of nine parties set aside differences in a political rally on a Bay of Bengal beach and opened a campaign to try to bring down the Government of Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi. 21
A British military officer testified about firing at two Irish Republican Army guerrillas at close range last March, in the first public examination of the anti-terrorist tactics used by Britain's elite commandos. 22
NATIONAL/26-38, 50-52
In Hurricane Gilbert's aftermath, as many as 120 people are feared dead in the Mexican city of Monterrey after four buses overturned in floodwaters. Six police officers died trying to rescue the stranded buses. 1
Trackers of Hurricane Gilbert, a team of fliers and meteorologists wearily headed for home as the hurricane ended a reign of terror, its violent center slamming into a desolate stretch of Mexico's coastline. 34
Yucatan rebuilding after Gilbert 34
Military workers have become ill at a Lockheed Corporation plant in Burbank, Calif., and many of them are believed to be involved in building a top-secret fighter. The illnesses have only added to the mystery. 1
A welfare revision bill languishes in House-Senate conference while a group of House liberals are objecting to Senate provisions that would require some welfare recipients to work or receive job training. 36
An old San Francisco shipyard is a battleground for an array of environmental and protest groups and the Navy, which wants to turn the yard into the homeport for the historic battleship Missouri. 26
Mother-daughter program at Illinois prison 28
Trial ordered for columnist in youth's shooting 29
Curriculum in Navajo language planned 51
Remote shacks on Cape Cod are caught up in a storm 51
Town survives without a company 52
Politics 30-31
Issues come second in the campaign for President not only because of the Bush and Dukakis campaign strategies but also because polls say voters will decide the election on the candidates' competence. 1
In the debate over military spending, George Bush and Michael Dukakis argue continually over which weapon systems to add, but both are already committed to budget policies requiring them to make painful cuts. 38
Voters are not sure what to think about the Presidential campaigns in Jersey City, N.J., and many seem to be looking in vain for a reason to support one candidate or the other. 30
News analysis: Dan Quayle's school record and military past continue to haunt the candidate. Regardless of how well he campaigns, polls show that about two thirds of the voters still harbor doubts about him. 31
Lloyd Bentsen appeals to the South as he shuttles through the states of the old Confederacy, making about as direct and open a regional appeal for the Democratic Presidential ticket as it is possible to make. 31
REGIONAL/39-47, 54-58
The ruin of at least five Torah scrolls was caused by vandals who broke into a Brooklyn synagogue and set fire to the building three days before the start of Yom Kippur. Torah scrolls are the most sacred objects in Judaism. 1
Changing six 42d Street theaters into a ''populist'' theater complex for low-priced live entertainment is planned by city and state officials in what is New York City's most ambitious cultural venture in decades. 1
A successful deterrent to auto thefts used in two Queens police precincts and to be expanded to much of the city lets car owners allow the police to stop their vehicles if it is being driven late at night. 42
In a parental rights fight over whether parents can have child custody after being charged with the serious injury or murder of a spouse, Joseph Pikul's two children were taken from an apparently happy home. 43
A Davis trial witness for prosecutors said he had never known the defendant, Larry Davis, to deal in drugs with police officers, countering Mr. Davis's explanation for trying to kill nine police officers. 47
First liver transplant is performed in New York State 54
An old law to save an old wall 54

---------------

dates: [None, None, None, '2019-06-01', None, None, None, None, None, None, None, None, None]
datePublished: 2019-07-07 00:00:00
Date Published:2019-07-07 00:00:00      
Erosion by the Jamuna has taken a serious turn in Bhuapur upazila as the river sees a sudden rise in water level due to onrush of water from the upstream in the last one month. Due to the sudden erosion many dwelling houses as well as a vast tract of croplands at different villages under Govindsi, Gabsara and Arjuna unions in the upazila were devoured within a few weeks. The worst affected villages are Khanurbari, Kostapara and Bhalkutia under Govindasi union as over 100 dwelling houses and a vast tract of croplands were devoured by the river in the last few days. The erosion affected people have taken shelter on different roads and other's houses. Meanwhile, demanding steps to protect their villages from the dreadful erosion the affected people, living alongside the river, formed a human chain at Kostapara village on Friday. Several hundred riverside people, carrying placards inscribed with different slogans, took part in the rally. Locals alleged that illegal extraction of sand from different places along the river using powerful dredgers is one of the main reasons behind the erosion. Local influential people, having political clout, extracting sand from the river and sell those from over a dozen sand landing stations within eight kilometre areas stretching from Bangabandhu Bridge East Cantonment area to Govindasi Ghat area, they added. Last year, erosion by the Jamuna devoured numerous dwellings and a vast tract of croplands at Arjuna, Bharua, Kuthir Boira, Jagatpura, Tarai and Balarampur villages in Bhuapur upazila and Gorilabari and Beltia village under Gohaliabari union in adjacent Kalihati upazila. Abdul Mazid of Kostapara village said over 100 dwellings and a vast tract of croplands at three villages under Govindasi union were devoured by the river in the last one week. Although the swelling river has been devouring houses, croplands, rural markets, schools, madrasas and other establishments for the last eight years, no step has been taken to protect the areas, he said. Tangail WDB Executive Engineer Sirajul Islam said Geo bags should have been dumped in the affected areas, but they could not do it due to shortage of Geo bags. Away in Netrakona, a newly constructed embankment along the Mohadeo river in Kalmakanda upazila collapsed within five months of its construction, affecting hundreds of families of at least 25 villages under different unions, reports our Mymensingh correspondent. Water Development Board (WDB) built the 285-metre-long embankment recently at a cost of Tk 17 lakh. Netrakona WDB. Sub Assistant Engineer Ibrahim Khalilullah said the construction work of the dyke was conducted on an emergency basis as there was no scope to start a fresh project to rise of water level in the river. "We are taking preparation to build a 300-metre embankment in Chikontop and Baruakona areas in the coming dry season with an estimated cost of Tk one crore," Engineer Khalilullah said, adding that the dam will be built with concrete blocks and guide walls. Contractor Fazlur Rahman, who got the work order, said the embankment collapsed due to strong current and the recent flash flood. Refuting the allegation of substandard work, the contractor said he completed the work as per the work schedule using bamboo, logs and sand bags. Mentionable, about 3,000 families under Rongchhati, Kharnoi and Lengura unions in the upazila have been affected in the recent flash flood.

---------------

dates: ['2017-08-10']
datePublished: 2017-09-29 00:00:00
Date Published:2017-09-29 00:00:00 A flood is a familiar drill for Anwar Hossain. He can't keep track of how many times he has dismantled and moved his house. Of the millions who live on the riverine islands, or chars, in the Jamuna, no one lives in one place for more than a few years. If a bad flood doesn't wash away their home, the river swallows up the land it's on sooner or later. So when the river rose to his doorstep in the end of July, Anwar was unfazed. Every home is prepared with dry food, and extra bamboo to raise their beds and other surfaces for when the waters rise. Nets and ropes allow them to hang their possessions out of the water's reach. When the waters retreated from his uthan, Anwar thought he had been spared the inconvenience of floods for the year. But in August, the waters were back. "In the afternoon, there was three feet of water," says Anwar. Usually the waters come gradually over three to four days. So he estimated the waters would rise 18-20 inches at most that night--not enough to submerge the bed. What followed, Anwar likens to Qiyamat, the Day of Judgement. Anwar's home, at the water's edge, was one of the first to be submerged. Where the water level might usually rise two feet overnight, on the evening of August 10, the water surged by five feet or more, something Anwar and his neighbours say they have never seen in their lives. The current swept away Anwar's entire house, with the precautionary items still unused. Usually during a flood, people count on their better-off neighbours for a degree of assistance in rounding up their possessions and dismantling their house. But this time everyone was scrambling to save themselves. Anwar managed to get his family of seven onto a small fishing boat and took them to a nearby plinth (a raised, flood-resistant area), constructed by Friendship, an NGO, in 2013. But this being the only higher ground in the Kheyar Alga char in Kurigram, it was already teeming with families and their livestock from miles around. Anwar put up his elderly mother at the plinth, but the rest of the family huddled in the boat with only a polythene sheet over their heads to protect them from the incessant rain. To use latrines, they had to come to the plinth by boat or make do without. The family spent 15 days in these conditions. They lived on chira muri and rice, distributed as immediate relief by the government and NGOs working in the area, but only for three days into the floods. Earlier, Anwar managed to take his main income source--his seven cows--to the plinth. When the waters started rising, Anwar was able to salvage the roof of his house but not his fencing from being washed away. He also lost his entire paddy crop and most of his household possessions. "How could I save my things if I myself was in danger of being washed away?" asks Anwar. The floods this year inundated a third of the country, devastating the northern and central districts. The International Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent (IFRC) called the flooding "the most serious in 40 years". Up to 700,000 homes have been damaged or destroyed. "This flood was worse than the one in 1988," says Anwar. Kurigram was among the worst affected districts, lying as it does at the junction of three major rivers--Jamuna, Teesta and Dharla. Heavy rainfall over several days and the onrush of water from upstream, where India had opened 54 gates of the Gajaldoba barrage, led to the rivers swelling dangerously. At least 12 people have died in Kurigram as a direct result of the August floods. Since the floodwaters receded, Anwar has had to sell off five of his cows, one by one. He is at a loss as to what to do to eke out a living now. Earlier, he worked on other people's land for a 50-50 share of the crop. "Farming is what we know. Even if we don't own land, we work on others'. I'm illiterate, I don't have the ability to go do a job in town," says Anwar. The government and NGOs rushed to deliver food aid to victims of the floods, but efforts to rehabilitate those who have lost their livelihoods are few and far between. "Government response to flood damages in char areas is limited, as they are hard pressed to provide rehabilitation support to all those on the mainland itself," says Abdus Salam Jakir, Union Parishad Chairman of Kamarjani union in Gaibandha. He says that of the 976 flood-impacted households in his union, the government only provided a bundle of tin (sheets of corrugated iron) and BDT 3000 each for re-building to 15 households, after accounting for transport costs from the mainland. "Rehabilitation requires a holistic year-round effort, due to the lack of permanent infrastructure on the chars," says Ahmed Toufiqur Rahman, Head of Good Governance at Friendship. Disconnected in their remote chars, people often have difficulty accessing government safety nets and support they're entitled to in reconstructing their homes in the aftermath of floods, he explains. "For post-disaster management and relief, there is a need to tailor programmes specifically to the chars," states Rahman. Right now, the water level is still high--it will drop some 10-15 feet over the next three months before the dry season. There is a char in sight in every direction. Older chars are distinguished by taller, denser eucalyptus trees (ubiquitous on the chars as they grow fast) and more settlements and cattle grazing. Jute, used to make fences and rope, dry in tepee-like arrangements. Newer chars are tiny islets where there are no trees, only kashful swaying in the wind. The geography of the chars makes it difficult for both NGOs and the government to function effectively there. For one, they are constantly changing. Equally important, transport to and from chars, particularly those that are out in the middle of the river, is time-consuming and difficult. Boats are the mainstay of the char residents. Mostly motor-powered trawlers ply the waters, but you still see the occasional boat row by with colourful sails. At each char, people carry umbrellas against the unforgiving sun while waiting for the boats to do everything from going to the market to visiting the doctor. If they miss the boat for the day, it's a day wasted for them. Keeping children in school is difficult all year, not just during the floods. Alpona, 30, is a mother of four from Kheyar Alga. There is no high school on the char. One of her boys attends school in Jatrapur, a large char connected to the mainland. From Kheyar Alga, schoolchildren have to walk a distance of 30 minutes and then take an hour's boat ride to reach Jatrapur. Post-flood, this journey can be undertaken by boat alone. But the school is still closed as it is difficult for children to cross the river. If the schoolchildren miss the regular boat going by the char on that route, for which they would usually pay BDT 10 each way, they would need to pay up to BDT 100 round trip for boat fare to attend school that day. Though the floodwaters have receded, children remain out of the classroom. Boats become the centre of the rescue effort during the floods. Households going under water were desperately seeking boats to get to higher ground. In Kheyar Alga, many turned to young Jahurul Islam for help. His house on the plinth sheltered Alpona's family, among many others, on an emergency basis while the floodwaters remained high. Roughly half of the population of the char had taken shelter on the plinth during this time. Jahurul himself had to kip on a small boat while entire families packed his small house. Char dwellers are used to seeking help from Jahurul, a Friendship-trained paralegal from the area. Jahurul also helped arrange for boats. "People contacted me to find out if any boats were available and to ask the owners to send these to evacuate those going under," he says. There are only seven large boats on the char, according to Jahurul, which are used to help evacuate char dwellers and livestock in emergencies. The rest, like Anwar, had to rely on small fishing boats. Alpona had contacted her neighbour beforehand about using their boat when in need. "When we are in trouble during the floods, wealthier people with big boats help us out. They help regardless of whether we pay them then or not," asserts Alpona. During the worst of the flooding between August 14 and 16, Alpona was forced to shift her family and whatever she could carry from her house to the plinth. Half of her home was later washed away in the current. Her family of six is now living in a small shack on another's land on the plinth. But Alpona's state was not always this precarious. Her husband was a farmer with a relatively large house and land which they would lease to sharecroppers like Anwar. But the river encroached on their land and the floods inundated the rest. Alpona's husband does nothing since he lost all his land. Like Anwar, faced with the loss of livelihood, he has been unable to cope. The only income in the family comes from their eldest son, 18, who works as a day labourer digging and raising land for houses. Alpona is weighed down by the need to make more permanent living arrangements on lower land like before, once the waters recede. But this too, will probably prove short-lived as the char people are habituated to constant drifting. "I've moved a lot in my life, at least 10 times in this area alone, for either flood or erosion. In one year, I moved house three times. But this time, I've been affected the most," states Alpona. The flooding in mid-August not only saw unprecedented levels of water and strong currents, but for the first time anyone can remember, the mainland was also badly flooded, catching residents completely unawares. Ayub Ali Sarkar, Union Parishad Chairman of Jatrapur, Kurigram, points to the faded lines on the walls in his office, showing how it was flooded hip-deep inside. "The people of this area are not used to floods in the sense that their harvest is usually affected but homes are not really damaged in this way," explains Sarkar. A government shelter in Kheyar Alga lies in ruins after it was severely damaged in an ordinary storm soon after being built. It is still in that state, with roofs missing and walls broken. Some families have nevertheless taken up shelter there with nowhere else to go. A month after the floods, many families continue to live on the plinth in Kheyar Alga and other shelters. Many of them have lost their homes and the land on which they once stood. In the coming months, local government officials, village elders and the influential will be gathering to decide on who will be given khas land and how the rest will be assisted. The people of the chars have long since adapted to the floods every year. But the suddenness and strength of the waters this year took them by surprise and denied them precious hours to take the necessary precautions to secure their home and possessions and flee to higher ground. Will this be the nature of future floods? Char communities will be particularly vulnerable to sudden flooding, because a system to cope is yet to be adapted. Their livelihoods and very existence, precarious enough as it is in the temporary char lands, are at stake. @#

---------------

dates: ['2019-07-09']
datePublished: 2019-08-11 00:00:00
Date Published:2019-08-11 00:00:00 The flood affected victims of Lalmonirhat have very little to look forward to this Eid. Many have lost their homes and source of income and are struggling to make ends meet. The flood victims of 108 villages of 27 unions in five upazilas of the districts are unable to even buy food let alone new dresses or sacrificial cattle. Most of these people have lost their homes, croplands and domestic animals in the recent floods and are yet to get back to normalcy. Several flood victims said they are waiting for help from government and non-government organisations to buy food and other things to celebrate Eid with their family. "I'm not able to purchase any new clothes for our three children this Eid. I cannot even buy good food and other essentials for the festival," said Abdul Quader, 48, a flood victim living in Kalmati village in Teesta River basin area of Lalmonirhat Sadar upazila. Flood hit Kulsum Bewa, 62, from the same upazila said her family had to evacuate their house and go take shelter on the elevated road for nearly 16 days just last month. Meanwhile flood victim Idris Ali, 45 of Gaddimari village in Hatibandha upazila was rendered jobless from July 9 to 30 and only got back to work on July 31. Chairman of Teesta River basin flood affected Rajpur union parishad in Lalmonirhat Sadar upazila, Mofazzal Hossain Mofa told the Daily Star many of the people in this area will have no reason to celebrate Eid following the devastation of the floods. The government has allocated 73,843 VGF (vulnerable group feeding) cards among ultra-poor families in 45 unions and two municipalities under five upazilas of the district ahead of Eid-ul-Azha and each card holder will be given 15 kg of rice, said District Relief and Rehabilitation Office (DRRO) Ali Haider. However, no special allocation has been allocated to help the flood-hit people in char areas to celebrate the festival, he added. @#

---------------

dates: ['2009-09-30']
datePublished: 2019-10-01 00:00:00
Date Published:2019-10-01 00:00:00 There was a crowd at Shukrabad Bus Stop in Dhaka around 2:45 pm after the two-hour-long torrential rain. Everybody, including school students and women, was desperately waiting for rickshaw, but the number of three-wheelers was very low compared to the passengers. People wade through ankle-deep water in front of the Secretariat after the heavy rain. Photo: Tuhin Shubhra Adhikary/Star Because all of them were trying to cross a waist-deep "waterbody" on the road leading towards Shukrabad Bazar. Raihan, a student of Daffodil University, along with his friend Rakib, somehow, managed a rickshaw for Tk 40 to cross only 200-feet long waterbody. Failing to get any rickshaw, many of others compelled to cross the dirty water as they had no other option at that time. Like Shukrabad, many other parts of the capital went under the knee-to-waist-deep water, causing immense sufferings to the city dwellers. Met office today recorded 45.2mm rain in Dhaka from 12:00 pm to 2:15 pm, Ashraful Alam, meteorologist of Bangladesh Met office, told The Daily Star. Owing to the rain, many roads including East Rajabazar, Mirpur, Motijheel, Karwan Bazar, Old Dhaka, Dhanmondi-27, Kazi Nazrul Islam Avenue, different parts of Mirpur and Green Road went underwater. The students suffered the most in the afternoon shower as most parts of Dhanmondi went under rainwater. The school students and their guardians were seen completely drenched in the heavy rain when they were returning homes in knee-deep water. While talking to The Daily Star, a businessman, said he took an Uber ride to reach his Dhanmondi residence around 2:00 pm. "When I was crossing Dhanmondi-27 intersection, stagnant water gushed inside the car." "Due to heavy jam created during the rain, I got off the car and reached home walking through knee-deep water," he said. @#

---------------

dates: ['2018-04-25']
datePublished: 2018-05-19 00:00:00
Date Published:2018-05-19 00:00:00 "I promise that you will not see these [waterlogging] from next year." LGRD and Cooperatives Minister Khandker Mosharraf Hossain said on July 26 last year A city of over 16 million, Dhaka is almost certain to go under water after a moderate rain. Only late last month, much of the capital was inundated following some little to moderate shower, causing public misery. The city needs an efficient drainage network, unobstructed canals and free flood zones around it to save it from the perennial waterlogging. But in the past 10 months since the minister made the promise, the city authorities did some routine clean-up of the scanty drainage network. That too remains half done. Apart from this, no other initiative has been taken to free canals and floodplains within the city from grabbers. Multiple development works in different parts of the capital have worsened the situation. The works include road improvement in Uttara, construction of metro rail piers along Rokeya Sarani and relocation of underground utility service lines along Kazi Nazrul Islam Avenue. On July 26 last year, Local Government, Rural Development and Cooperatives Minister Khandker Mosharraf Hossain said that waterlogging in Dhaka city would not recur in 2018 as the government had learnt a lesson. Following his promise, Dhaka Water Supply and Sewerage Authority (Wasa) had asked for an additional allocation of Tk 60cr for cleaning up the canals, said Wasa adviser Abul Kashem. As there was no response and the current fiscal year is drawing to a close, they revised the amount to Tk40cr. The money is yet to be released. ASM Mahbubul Alam, director general of Local Government Division, said they requested the finance ministry for additional allocations. "We don't exactly know the rationale for the delay," he said. "I think Wasa will get some money." Asked what Wasa would do with the money at the last moment when monsoon is almost here, Alam said, "They will spend as much as they can and return the rest or keep it with them for next year." Contacted, Wasa Managing Director Taqsem A Khan said, "We are taking some routine, piecemeal measures of cleaning the scanty artificial drainage lines and maintaining pump machines to pump out accumulated rainwater." Most of the flood flow zones, canals and low-lying water retention areas, earmarked in the Detailed Area Plan (DAP) for conservation, have been destroyed to make way for real estate business and "development" leading to today's deplorable drainage situation, he said. "Dhaka city's storm drainage problem cannot be permanently solved without reclaiming designated flood flow zones and water retention areas," he noted. On the other hand, ground percolation as a means of rainwater management has also been made difficult as 90 percent of the 400sqkm Wasa area of the city is paved with concrete. The ministry usually allocates Tk 5.5cr on top of Wasa's own allocation of around Tk 11cr every monsoon. This money is needed only for the routine cleaning and maintenance of Wasa drainage service, he said. Shahid Uddin, former Wasa chief engineer, who is currently a contractual Wasa director, said they wanted to re-excavate 30km length of 19 canals within this month to enhance water passage capacity. They started the work in some places and hoped for extra allocations. Apart from Wasa, six other authorities deal with Dhaka's drainage system on a piecemeal basis without much knowledge about who is doing what. They are: the two city corporations, the water development board, Rajuk, the cantonment board and big private housing developers like Bashundhara. As a result, Dhaka plunges into a nightmare of public misery every time there is a normal monsoon shower that instantly floods the city roads, town planners say. The two city corporations maintain over 2,000km feeder drains (open and small diameter pipes) to drain water from homes and rainwater to take them to canals and wide diameter (Wasa) storm sewer system. The government made a storm drainage master plan for Dhaka in 2016 but it could not be implemented as they did not assign any authority for the job, officials said. Wasa, with 370km storm drainage pipelines of 750mm to 1,830mm diameter, covers only one-fifth of its 400sqkm service area. At present, rainfall above 40mm at a time in Dhaka city floods the city with water which takes at least three hours to recede. The available pumping facility can drain out up to 20mm rain, according to officials. Rain water is supposed to be carried away instantly to low-lying retention areas by a well-networked storm drainage system. But with the network destroyed and the artificial pipelines clogged with solid wastes, it takes hours for rainwater to pass. Wasa maintains 26 canals, each 75km long, as part of its storm drainage system. But they mostly remain clogged with uncollected solid wastes. Ten km of the canals have been turned into concrete box culverts to build roads on them, significantly reducing their capacity to carry water. According to leading urban planners, low-lying wetlands, flood flow zones, storm water retention ponds, ditches and canals have all been filled up in the name of development. All of this has blocked the natural passage of monsoon rainwater. Time and again, authorities have been warned of grim consequence in urban storm water management but they paid no heed. According to the Flood Action Plan and DAP, the city should have conserved 5,523 acres of water retention area (which is only 1.57 percent of the 1,528sqkm of Dhaka's master plan), 20,093 acres of canals and rivers (5.7 percent) and 74,598 acres (21 percent) flood flow zones. With most of the surviving 26 city canals under illegal occupation, the government has taken up a Tk 607cr project for land acquisition and excavation of five canals to ease the capital's waterlogging problem. The five canals are Hazaribagh, Baishteki, Sangbadaik Colony, Begunbari and Manda Khal across south and north Dhaka cities. The canals are public property. Over 82 percent of the money will be spent on the acquisition of 30.5 acres of "private land" and the rest on compensation for structures, excavation and bank development. The Executive Committee of the National Economic Council with the Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina in the chair approved the draft proposal on April 4. The local government ministry proposed the two-year scheme to be implemented by Dhaka Wasa by December next year. @#

---------------

dates: ['2019-02-07', None, None]
datePublished: 2019-02-27 00:00:00
Date Published:2019-02-27 00:00:00      
Farmers are acutely at risk of contracting sewage-borne diseases Comilla City Corporation's unplanned drainage system is turning farmland into water bodies; as polluted water is flooding hundreds of hectares of farmland. However, the city corporation has undertaken several mega projects to improve  rural infrastructure and increase opportunities for urbanization. Among these projects, one of them was undertaken to ensure a better sewerage system. However, the newly-constructed drainage system--in nine wards of Comilla City Corporation, including wards 23 and 24-- has brought sewage onto arable farmland, into open fields, and near educational institutions; mostly harming farmers in the process. Diseases--such as: cholera, dysentery, typhoid, and diarrhea--are emerging from these unhealthy conditions. Various crops, dwellings, schools, and other institutions, are in danger of becoming water-logged. Farmers complain that due to the negligence of the city corporation officials, the drains empty onto farmland instead of into rivers or canals. They claim that if the sewerage system had been carefully planned, the farmers would not be suffering. Comilla City Corporation Mayor Monirul Haque Sakku said the drainage line empties onto farmland for various reasons; including that some cases filed against construction of the line, by people who do not want drains over their land, have left the process incomplete. He said: "We are trying to find a solution to this problem." Visiting the area, this correspondent found that starting from the Border Guards Bangladesh (BGB) Comilla sector, the main drain pipe ends near Nandanpur Bishwaroad. Branches of drainpipes from other areas link to this main drain line, leading the sewage water away to places near farmlands, houses, and educational institutions in several areas, including: Gandhamati, Changini, Batabaria, and Rampur. The main drain line of the 23rd and 24th ward ends near Batabaria school, while Ghungaijhuri canal is only 2700 square feet away. If the drain had been extended by 2700 square feet--over the Changini-Nandanpur area to the canal--then the problems would not have existed. There are at least 30 government and non-government institutions in wards 23 and 24, including: the Bangladesh Academy for Rural Development (Bard), the BGB sector headquarters, Comilla University, a section of cantonment, a cadet college, Shalban Vihara, and the Buddhist Bihar Museum. Locals said if the unplanned sewerage system persists, these places will flood with polluted water. A farmer from Nandanpur, Abul Hashem said they are struggling to yield crops as contaminated water is flooding their arable farmland. They demand the pipeline be moved so that it ends at Ghungaijhuri canal, rather than on the farmland. Many people--including Md Ayub Ali, Md Lutfur Rahman, Zahid Hossain Mithu, and Md Abul Kalam--have complained that apart from harming the crops, farmers are also contracting skin diseases from the contaminated water. Dr Mosleh Uddin, president of Comilla Environment Movement, said: "Due to the dirty and contaminated water of the drains, the farmers of those areas are [working] in extremely dangerous conditions. "All the polluted water from the city is flowing onto agricultural land. As there is no way to dispose of the sewage--other than in the southern area of the city corporation--the area will be considered a recycling zone." He said it is possible to protect the agricultural land--at least in those areas--by creating a recycling project. Comilla City Corporation Mayor Monirul Haque Sakku said: "The work to extend the drainpipes, for them to empty into canals, is going ahead according to the master plan. It will be completed in phases. He also said alongside it, there is a plan to extend the main drain line of Nandanpur towards Ghungaijhuri canal. The mayor said: "A man named Abdul Jalil from ward 24 has filed cases against seven city corporation officials, including me. Construction of drains in various places is hindered due to these problems."

---------------

dates: ['2019-11-05', None, None, None, None, None, None, None, None, None, None, None]
datePublished: 2019-11-15 00:00:00
Date Published:2019-11-15 00:00:00      
The devastating storm damaged least 5,017 fish enclosures, and 2,000 hectares of Aman, along with large amounts of winter vegetables, betel leaves, mustard, and boroi across the district The recent cyclonic storm Bulbul has greatly affected farmers in Satkhira, particularly those in Shyamnagar, Assasuni, Kaliganj, Sadar, and Tala upazilas, flooding vast amount of fish enclosures and crops in its wake. According to district Department of Agriculture Extension sources, the devastating storm damaged least 5,017 fish enclosures, and 2,000 hectares of Aman, along with large amounts of winter vegetables, betel leaves, mustard, and boroi across the district. Md Osman Gani Sohab, a farmer from Shyamnagar, said he lost his Aman crops on four bighas of land in the flood caused by incessant rain during the cyclone Bulbul. Another Aman farmer Khalilur Rahman from Sadar upazila, who planted his crops on five bighas of leased land, said: "All my crops were damaged overnight during the storm." Abdul Bari, a shrimp farmer from Assasuni upazila, said: "My shrimp enclosure on 150 bighas was completely flooded, causing me to lose shrimps and whitefishes worth around Tk35-40 lakh." Belal Hossain, another shrimp farmer from Shyamnagar upazila, said: "After my fish enclosure on 30 bighas was flooded, I lost shrimps and whitefishes worth around Tk30-35 lakh." Arbinda Biswas, deputy director of the Department of Agriculture Extension of Satkhira district, said: "2,000 hectares of Aman which were destroyed by the flood and storm were worth approximately Tk28.33 crore. Apart from this, 80 hectares of winter vegetables worth Tk2.8 crore, 12 hectares of betel leaves worth Tk1.51 crore, 50 hectares of mustard worth Tk26.4 lakh, were also damaged, causing an aggregate loss of around Tk33,10,90,000." Satkhira Fisheries Officer Moshiur Rahman said: "At least 5,017 shrimp enclosures on 5,719 hectares across Assasuni, Shyamnagar, and Kaliganj upazilas were flooded causing a loss of 414 tons shrimps and whitefishes worth around Tk10.36 crore." Burigoalini UP Chairman Bhabatash Mandal said: "The cyclonic storm wreaked havoc in my union. The sheer force of the storm uprooted a large number of big trees. Pucca and tin-shed homes were damaged, and shrimp enclosures and croplands were inundated." Ahead of the cyclonic storm Bulbul, the danger signal 10 was hoisted at Satkhira. The storm which hit the district around 5am on Sunday lasted till 9am, causing substantial damage to homes, croplands, and roads alike.

---------------

dates: ['2019-07-01']
datePublished: 2020-01-13 00:00:00
Date Published:2020-01-13 00:00:00 A lone structure is taking shape on a featureless, grey horizon. Two figures work under the beating sun, on an otherwise deserted landscape. One digs, the other carries loads of earth on her head. The sky is deep blue. All around there is sand... the dark grey patches where the river has left fertile alluvial deposits, and any stray seed will flourish; and the stark white, devoid of nutrition yet perfect for growing, say, ground nuts. Hints of green are beginning to appear in patches: unmistakable signs of promise. When we encountered this scene, we were passing by, returning from a meeting in an adjacent island. Taking a break from their backbreaking work, Bashir and Amina (not their real names) told us their story. Years ago, this was a thriving village. Bashir and Amina lived in it with their seven children, and while it wasn't a glorious life, they got by. In 2011, they lost their home and the only land they owned to river erosion. For those living on islands in the middle of the river, the loss of homes is almost normal. Every year, the river breaks away large swathes of land from one place, and deposits it in another. Millions in Bangladesh live on these fluid landscapes, and like the land, they are perpetual nomads. They have never had roads, electricity, or much access to government services. But Ganeshyampur, near the confluence of the Teesta and Brahmaputra rivers in northern Bangladesh, was part of the mainland. Only after 2010 did the area begin to erode. When Bashir lost his land, he was so dependent on it that afterwards he couldn't pay the minimal rent for a house. The family spent eight years squatting beside a highway. Deprived of their own land to farm, the two have been relying on sporadic work as daily wage labourers. Their dreams of stability have been anchored to the land they lost. "Every year I come back to see what the prospects are," says Bashir. The relationships that people have with the river are complex. In a sense, it is nothing less than a parent. It provides land, water and fertility. But the river is also a monster, because in a moment it takes away everything it gives. In July last year, floods destroyed acres of farmland, broke homes, killed livestock and even swept away children. Yet, when the water subsides, it often leaves behind the promise of rebirth. Last year's flood left more sediments on Bashir's land, and the water receded to a distance of three kilometres away, convincing him that it was time to start building. After five days of toiling under the beating sun, Bashir and Amina had raised a structure. Now, a few months on, several others have also settled in the vicinity. This is a community of mavericks. Being one of the first to settle the land means that they must build everything from scratch. There is no sanitation or access to clean water until somebody sinks a tube well or builds a latrine. Bashir has improvised a latrine, but for water he must walk to a neighbour's house almost two kilometres away. They have added two more huts to the first: a kitchen and a room to accommodate the family (three sons and a daughter, Nolok). Nolok is 30 but her parents cannot marry her off because of the stigma of her mental illness. Her mind is apparently a child's. The exile has exacted the worst toll on Nolok. Having lived for years in poverty without any government support and without access to social services or healthcare, Nolok hasn't had the protections that she might have under different circumstances. She has one daughter who is a toddler, and is currently pregnant with another child. Rather than joy, Bashir's eyebrows furrow with burden at the thought of these fatherless grandchildren. Last year, river erosion affected several districts in Bangladesh that have never had this problem before. In Shariatpur, erosion has rendered some 4,000 families homeless, and caused a 2-storey health complex to crumble. In Manikganj, hundreds of homes and at least one school were swallowed by the Padma. Even smaller rivers like the Nabaganga have uprooted hundreds of families. Landscapes that are prone to erosion, especially the areas not attached to the mainland, are in a sense detached from state mechanisms. The Jamuna is the widest river in Bangladesh, 12km at its maximum. Getting from the mainland to some of the remotest islands takes upwards of four hours, assuming a boat is ready and waiting. The Bangladesh government has significant funds allocated to rehabilitate river erosion victims every year, and to check river erosion. Then there are NGOs bringing in adaptive solutions--like Friendship's hospital ships. Perhaps Nolok's children will not see the kind of vulnerability that she has experienced. But with some 68,000 displaced each year by river erosion, there needs to be a national strategy to respond to the question: how do we extend care, protection and opportunity to families who are vulnerable and rendered landless by these results of climate change? At least for the next few years, Nolok and her family have the security of a home. Her children will not be spending this chilly winter on the edges of a highway. The ground nuts that Bashir's family has planted on about six decimals of land nearby are now a few weeks from harvest. They might harvest up to two maunds (75 KG), depending on their luck and skill, which would fetch about Tk 15,000 in the market--a significant boost. But the sandbanks they grow on serve as a reminder that the river, though out of sight, is never far. Naushad Ali Husein is a senior executive at Friendship, an NGO. @#

---------------

dates: ['1988-08-01', None, None]
datePublished: 1988-09-06T05:00:00.000Z
NEWS SUMMARY
1988-09-06T05:00:00.000Z
International A3-17
Bangladesh flooding has killed 550 people and left 30 million homeless. In Dhaka, prices for food and kerosene have increased by 30 to 200 percent. The destruction has been widespread, officials said. Page A1
Canada will give Arctic territory to 39,000 Indians, Eskimos and people of mixed ancestry. Prime Minister Brian Mulroney signed an agreement that cedes title to an area of about 260,000 square miles. A1
A campaign to protect elephants from poachers in Kenya's Kora National Game Reserve has been started by George Adamson, who with his wife, Joy, created the legend of Elsa, the lion of ''Born Free.'' A1
The electricians' union in Britain was expelled from the Trades Union Congress, causing the most serious split in decades in the British union movement as a national postal strike is spreading. A3
Prosecutors read charges in Moscow against Yuri Churbanov, son-in-law of Leonid Brezhnev, and eight others at the opening of their trial. Defense lawyers complained about pretrial publicity. A5 The style of Azerbaijan's new leader, Abdul Rahman Vezirov, differs from that of his predecessor, Geidar Aliyev. Mr. Vezirov turned a guest house that Mr. Aliyev built for Leonid Brezhnev into a public wedding hall. A4
News analysis: Japan is bolder in world affairs, taking intitiatives in foreign policy that it had been unwilling to take earlier. Other nations are prodding Japan to contribute more to the world. A8
Iraqi troops on the Turkish border dug in to assert authority over an area that Kurdish guerrillas had claimed. The action has virtually sealed the border, diplomats said, trapping many Kurds in Iraq. A10
Military analysis: The loss of plans for the American role in allied operations in the event of war in Europe could be the most serious aspect of the espionage operation uncovered in West Germany last month. A17
Israeli Labor party opens campaign A3
Greece and U.S. suspend talks on military bases A16
Brother of Seoul's ex-leader is found guilty of corruption A6
National A18-21, B7-8, D12
The Air Force launched a Titan 2 with a secret payload. The rocket, a reconditioned intercontinental ballistic missile, is the first of 68 boosters intended to diminish the military's reliance on the space shuttle. A1
Delays in two space shuttle flights out of nine planned for next year will force postponements in the launching of the Hubble Space Telescope and three telescopes meant to scan the heavens from the shuttle. B7
The Federal Home Loan Bank Board agreed to a rescue plan for the American Savings and Loan Association that will cost the agency $2 billion. The transaction is the most expensive for a single thrift institution. A1
The economic costs of illiteracy are increasing as the United States needs more better educated workers in services. An estimated 23 million people are functionally illiterate; the number is growing, experts say. A1
San Diego is fighting homelessness by making it profitable for private developers to build and operate single-room occupancy hotels. The city has relaxed building codes and offered low-interest loans to builders. A18
A Houston television personality, Marvin Zindler, won permission from Hanoi for two Vietnamese children to rejoin their father. Mr. Zindler became famous for closing ''The Best Little Whorehouse in Texas.'' A18
Effects of drought linger on Mississippi River A20
Spending varies widely on legal defense of the poor B8
Politics D12 Vice President Bush praised American patriotism and promised to make jobs for all Americans the top aspect of his economic policy. Mr. Bush attacked the Democrats at three stops in California. D12
Michael S. Dukakis promised prosperity for the middle class. At a rally in Detroit, the Democratic Presidential nominee said that average families could not afford another Republican administration. D12
Labor Day is the traditional kickoff for the Presidential race. Both campaigns arranged events for maximum impact on television, keeping in mind that television viewing increases in the fall. D12
Quayle, at Statue of Liberty, attacks Dukakis on Pledge D12
Washington Talk B8
Sharing the defense burden: U.S. allies concerned Regional B1-6
A compromise in Yonkers eluded the Mayor and the City Council. After a day of meetings, they gave no indication that a breakthough had been made to carry out the court-ordered housing desegregation plan. A1
Marchers in the Labor Day parade said Americans should pause to praise workers and contemplate the role of labor unions in the nation's history. Others wondered whether the day has lost its meaning. B1
New Yorkers unwound outdoors at Labor Day events in Brooklyn and Manhattan. About 850,000 attended the West Indian-American Day carnival in Brooklyn; thousands watched the labor parade in Manhattan. B1 Drug abuse as a political issue is cutting across the lines of Congressional Districts in New York. It is the most important issue in seven primary contests for Democratic Congessional nominations. B1
Urban school districts in New Jersey have raised concern about the quality of education. The system for financing education is flawed, a judge has ruled, because the quality of schooling in the suburbs is higher. B1
A Wells Fargo robbery trial opens in Hartford this week for seven defendants linked to a Puerto Rican terrorist group. They were arrested three years ago and charged with the 1983 robbery of $7 million. B3

---------------

dates: ['2019-07-09']
datePublished: 2019-08-08 00:00:00
Date Published:2019-08-08 00:00:00 The flood has caused crop losses amounting to about Tk 1,152 crore of tens of thousands farmers, mainly in the northern region, according to an estimate of the Department of Agricultural Extension (DAE). The inundation damaged crops on 1.09 lakh hectares affecting more than 6.51 lakh farmers in 31 districts, said officials. Vegetable growers suffered the biggest losses from the flood that began early last month resulting from heavy rains, followed by jute and aus paddy producers. The DAE estimates that the inundation destroyed summer vegetables on 9,841 hectares area and almost mature aus paddy on 25,851 hectares. Farmers had planted aus on 11.49 lakh hectares this year, which is less than the targeted area. Overall yield of the summer crop is likely to be 22 lakh tonnes because of decreased acreage for growers' switch to jute, maize and vegetable for higher returns to recover the lower return from winter crop boro and crop damage for flood, said the US Department of Agriculture (USDA) in its July issue of Grain and Feed Update on Bangladesh. The USDA said the monsoon season in Bangladesh officially started on June 17 and heavy rains began on July 9 across the country, including the upstream neighbour of Nepal and the two Indian states of Assam and Meghalaya. "The massive rains triggered widespread flooding and landslides and affected the livelihood of 6 million people," it said, adding that aus rice, transplanted aman rice seedbeds, jute, vegetables, sugarcane, banana and chili were the most damaged crops. Bangladesh is the seventh most vulnerable country with regard to the adverse effects of climate change, said the US agency. The USDA lowered its forecast on Bangladesh's rice output for the 2019-20 season -- which runs from May to April -- to 3.52 crore tonnes from 3.53 crore tonnes. Apart from aus paddy, farmers had to count losses of sown aman on 29,635 hectares and seedlings of transplanted aman 11,875 hectares. Aman is the second rice crop after boro and seedlings production of the autumn crop has been on along with transplantation. To help farmers get seedlings, the DAE has taken an initiative to produce seedlings on 75 acres of government-owned land and 530 acres of farmer-owned lands by providing them with production cost, said Md Abdul Muyeed, director of the DAE's field services wing. It is also helping growers to make 2,500 floating seedbeds of aman so that they can transplant, he added. Besides food producers, many growers, who cultivated the cash crop jute this year, incurred losses due to flood. Jute on 22,039 hectares area was damaged, according to the DAE. The DAE has taken a Tk 80 crore scheme to encourage cultivation of mustard, maize and wheat in the coming winter, Muyeed said. "Priority will be given to the flood-affected regions," he added. @#

---------------

dates: [None, None, '1987-08-02', None, None, None, None, None]
datePublished: 1987-09-05T05:00:00.000Z
Misery Rising In the Floods In Bangladesh
1987-09-05T05:00:00.000Z
Jainab Begum, who says her age is about 30, marched through the streets of Dhaka the other day along with 300 other flood victims demanding food and work.
''My small thatched house was washed away along with everything that I had,'' Mrs. Begum said in a choked voice as the tried to shield her one-and-a-half-month-old daughter from the rain by spreading the loose end of her tattered sari over the infant's head. To feed a family of five, she is employed breaking bricks to make gravel for construction.
Mrs. Begum is among 1.5 million people who have lost their homes since the devastating floods began Aug. 2. The official death toll today was 613, but a high Government official dealing with the floods said the figure was closer to 5,000.
''We have been instructed to suppress the death toll,'' he said. ''Thousands more will die of starvation and epidemic in the coming days.'' Called Worst in 70 Years
President H. M. Ershad said last week that ''this is the severest flood the nation has seen in 70 years'' in terms of the area hit and the number of people affected and displaced. He said it had caused ''unprecedented damage in life and property.''
The floods have affected all but a few areas in the southwest of Bangladesh, a country of 100 million people about the size of Wisconsin. The official estimate of damage is $1.5 billion.
In the districts of North Bengal, the worst affected region, deaths from starvation and diarrhea have been reported. Although the Government denied any starvation deaths, it acknowledged that more than 183 people had died so far of diarrhea, which has broken out in epidemic form because of lack of safe drinking water. Most of the wells in the region have been badly damaged by flooding.
Bangladesh is flooded almost every year because of heavy snowfall in the Himalayas and its subsequent melting, excessive local rainfall and silting up of rivers, including the Brahmaputra and the Ganges, the two major rivers that criss-cross the country.
''Apart from this, it also appears that this year breaches in embankments along the rivers upstream in India and perhaps release of too much water suddenly caused onrush of water in northern Bangladesh leading to heavy submergence,'' said B. M. Abbas, an expert on the country's water resources. Deforestation Cited
The ferocity of the flooding this year, he said, ''is because of the massive deforestation in the catchment of the rivers which earlier used to blunt the intensity of flood.''
To cope with the situation, Bangladesh, according to official estimate, urgently needs 1.5 million tons of food grains and more than $100 million in cash to repair damaged roads and culverts, sink wells, build homesteads and procure helicopters and speed boats to expedite relief operation. [ In Washington, a spokesman for the Agency for International Development said the United States had given Bangladesh $22,425,000 in emergency aid in connection with the floods. The money is to be used for foods like rice and wheat and wheat seed, he said. Regular American aid to Bangladesh for the current fiscal year is almost $162 million, he said. ] General Ershad called last week for an all-party meeting on Monday, saying he wanted to work out a formula to tackle the flood aftermath nationally. His offer was spurned by the opposition on the grounds that he was elected illegally under martial law.
Relief Ministry officials said that if substantial foreign aid was not immediately available, it would almost be impossible to arrest famine.
A less severe flood in 1974 produced famine that killed at least 40,000 people - the unofficial toll was more than 300,000 - and its aftermath led in 1975 to the violent overthrow of the Government headed by country's founder, Sheik Mujibur Rahman. Gravest Threat to Ershad
With the effects of the flood becoming clearer as the flood waters recede, and with the opposition intent on making a political issue of the situation, President Ershad faces the gravest threat to his authority since he came to power in a military coup in 1982.
The opposition has been accusing the Government of failing to supply minimum relief to flood victims and has demanded its resignation.
At the same time, Bangladeshis question whether permanent flood control measures are possible to halt the misery that accompany the recurrent floods.
''Flood in Bangladesh can't be controlled even with all the resources of the world put together,'' President Ershad told foreign journalists recently. ''Even partial protection requires a lot of money, and Bangladesh is a poor country.''

---------------

dates: ['2019-07-03']
datePublished: 2019-07-13 00:00:00
Date Published:2019-07-13 00:00:00 Overall flood situation in the country deteriorated further today as water levels at all major rivers marked rise inundating more fresh areas, marooning thousands of people and disrupting road communications in different areas. Water levels at 79 river stations monitored by Flood Forecasting and Warning Centre (FFWC) have marked rise while 11 stations recorded fall today. Among the 93 monitored stations, water levels at 23 river stations are flowing above danger level while water levels at two river stations have been registered steady, said a bulletin issued by the FFWC. The major rivers in Chattogram, Sylhet and Rangpur divisions may rise rapidly. "Water levels in all the four basins are rising but of them rivers in Meghna and Brahmaputra basins particularly in the Teesta sub-basin are swelling in a faster pace," a FFWC spokesperson told BSS at around midday today. Netrokona, Sunamganj, Sylhet, Chattogram, Cox's Bazar, Bandarban, Lalmonirhat, Kurigram, Jamalpur, Gaibandha and Bogura were among the worst affected areas where the flood situation may deteriorate further due to rainfall in north, north-east and hill regions, said FFWC. The government has already started relief operations in the affected areas and opened control rooms to monitor the flood situation. Medical teams led by civil surgeons are working in the affected areas Patenga Met office recorded 122.4 mm of rainfall during the last 24 hours ending 3 pm today, causing serious disruptions to civic life, port and businesses activities in the city. City's all rivers, canals and drains were full to the brim of floodwater caused by the torrential rainfall coupled with full tide water. Low-lying areas including Chawkbazar, Bakalia, Sholakbahar, Agrabad, Halisahar, Muradpur, Bohaddarhat, Kapasgola, Parbartak Intersection, KB Aman Ali Road, DC Road, Chandgaon, Sholashahar Gate No. 2, East Nasirabad and Dewanbazar areas were inundated in nearly knee-to-waist-deep water. Chattogram District Administration evacuated around 800 families from risky hill slopes in the city fearing landslide and sent them to eight shelter centres, said Delwar Hossain, Additional Deputy Commissioner (Revenue). Shah Amanat International Airport sources said a few flights could not land in the airport while some others were delayed to fly because of heavy downpours. Chattogram Civil Surgeon Office formed 284 medical teams and a control room for monitoring emergency situation in flood affected areas. Flood situation has worsened further as water level of the river Teesta at the Nilphamari point is flowing by 50 cm above its danger mark. Onrush of water from upstream region and heavy rainfall triggered floods in 15 char areas under Nilphamari district leaving over 20,000 families marooned. Low-lying areas in the district were flooded as water levels in the major rivers rose sharply, said Md Abdullah Al Mamun, executive engineer of Water Development Board of Nilphamari. Incessant rainfall and onrush of water from upstream flooded Chokoria and Pekuya upazila of the district leaving over one lakh people marooned. Cox's Bazar district witnessed incessant rainfall in the past seven days and the Matamuhuri river is flowing above its danger mark due to onrush of water from hilly areas, said an official of upazila Water Development Board. Chairman of Suragpur-Manikpur union Azimul Haque told BSS that roads, houses, schools and other infrastructures went under floodwater creating immense suffering for the people. Chokoria Upazila Nirbahi Officer (UNO) Nuruddin Muhammad Shibli Noman said local administration is distributing dry food among the flood-hit people. A total of 30 tonnes of rice were disbursed in the flood affected areas. Overall flood situation in hill district deteriorated due to heavy rain and onrush water from upstream. Sangu River at Bandarban and Dohazari points has crossed danger level, according to the Flood Forecasting warning Center (FFWC). Road communications of hill district Bandarban with other parts of the country remained suspended as Chittagong-Bandarban road at Keranihat area is under water for five days. About 20,000 people of low-lying areas of the district remained struck by flood water. More than 2500 families have taken shelter in 131 shelter centers. District administration is distributing 'khichuri', meat and drinking water two times a day among the affected people. Dry foods are being distributed in other shelter centers. Monsoon flood triggered by heavy rainfall and onrush of hilly water inundated 40 villages under Jhinaigati upazila in Sherpur district leaving 5,000 families marooned. Officials and representatives of local government bodies told BSS that several hundreds of houses, roads and other infrastructures have been completely or partially damaged alongside standing crops of vast tract of lands, which went under water. Flood situation in Sherpur district may deteriorate further, if monsoon rains are likely to prolong, the Met Office sources said. About 40,000 families have been affected in seven northern districts where flood situation further deteriorated today despite onrushing water from the upstream receded at Teesta Barrage Project (TBP) point. Officials of Water Development Board (WDB) said the major rivers of Rangpur, Nilphamari, Lalmonirhat, Kurigram, Gaibandha, Bogura and Sirajganj were flowing above their danger marks (DM) at eight points in the basin at 3 pm today. Teesta crossed its DM for the first time in recent times at Kawnia point where the river was flowing 12 cm above its danger level at 3 pm, Superintending Engineer (SE) of WDB for Rangpur Circle-1 Md. Harun Ar Rashid said. The Teesta was flowing 50cm above the DM at Dalia at 12 last night while at 37cm above at 3 pm today, Executive Engineer of the WDB's TBP Division Rabiul Islam told BSS. The Dharla was flowing 57 cm above the DM at Kurigram, Brahmaputra by 12 cm at Noonkhawa, 45 cm at Chilmari and by 42 cm above the DM at Fulchhari and Ghaghot by 16 cm at Gaibandha points at 3 pm today, he said. WDB officials said the Jamuna was flowing 37 cm above the DM at Bahadurabad while 3 cm below the DM at Sariakandi, 24 cm below the DM at Kazipur and 48 cm below the DM at Sirajganj point. However, there is a possibility of improvement of flood situation in the side of Teesta in Lalmonirhat, Nilphamari and some areas of Rangpur and Gaibandha districts due to sharp fall of onrushing water. The government has launched relief operation as the current spate of deluge exposed thousands of people to sufferings following inundation of vast low-lying areas in the upper Brahmaputra basin. Water level of the Brahmaputra, one of the mighty rivers in the country, crossed its danger mark today morning inundating the river basin areas including char ones. The water levels in the Brahmaputra rose by 46 cm. With the rise of water level in the Brahmaputra river, the river basin areas of Sundarganj, Sadar, Fulchhari and Saghata upazila had been inundated and the standing crops particularly jute and summer vegetables went under flood water. Apart from this, flowing rise of water level in the river, the erosion took serious turn at many places along the western sides of the river including Horipur, Kapasia and Kamarjani of the district creating immense sufferings and much anxiety to the erosion victims and also making the river bank people threatened. The district and the upazila administrations had got ready with relief materials and manpower to address the flood situation in the district efficiently. They were also monitoring the situation closely and briefing the higher authority concerned about the latest situation and its doings side by side with opening a control room at the DC office to help inform the people about floods, the DC added. @#

---------------

dates: ['2017-04-01']
datePublished: 2017-05-16 00:00:00
Date Published:2017-05-16 00:00:00 Erosion in haor areas by the Dhanu river, along with heavy rainfall, has become a serious problem for hundreds of families in Khaliajury upazila of Netrakona. Khaliajury and Mohanganj upazilas in Netrakona are the worst affected areas due to the recent flash flood, locals said. They said erosion has hit Goalbari Natunpara, Tatia, Panchgachia, Hayatpur villages of Nagar union; Daudpur, Mukimpur, Gobindapur, Patra, Sultanpur, Baganbari of Chakua union; Jagannathpur, Islampur, Rasulpur, Banuari, of Mendipur union; Gachikhai, Kadirpur, Jugimara, Mominpur and Gazipur of Khaliajury Sadar union; Charpara, Panchhat, Boyra, Batuai of Gazipur union; and Shyampur, Kutubpur and Krishnapur of Krishnapur union. Thousands of homesteads are under threat of erosion due to high waves in the haor waters, said Khaliajury Sadar Union Parishad Chairman Md Sanwaruzzaman Jausef. Flood water normally enters haor areas at the end of Bangla month of Jaistha or in the beginning of Ashar, and this year's early flood has created havoc for thousands of families in the haors, said Krishnapur Union Parishad Chairman Nazim Uddin Sarker, adding that haor people erect protection walls with bamboo and polythene around their homesteads during the rainy season. "Half of my homestead has already been eroded," lamented Suranjit Das of Nazipur village in Krishnapur union in Khaliajury. Suranjit's neighbours, Ranadir Sarker and Alok Sarker, said erosion has added extra trouble for them while they are facing serious problems due to the untimely flood. Khaliajury Upazila Parishad Chairman Shamsuzzaman Talukder Soyeb said erosion may take a serious turn when the rainy season starts in full swing. He demanded immediate steps by the administration to save the homesteads of the flood victims. Khaliajury Upazila Nirbahi Officer (UNO) Mohammed Tofael Ahmed said he visited some affected villages. "We urged the higher authorities to take immediate steps to protect the homesteads of the flood victims," the UNO said. Some 30,000 families were affected in the recent flood in Khaliajury, he added. Agriculture also faced a serious loss in the flashflood that submerged 69,710 hectares of land out of 1,84,320 hectares targeted for Boro cultivation in eight upazilas of Netrakona, said the deputy director of the Department of Agriculture Extension in the district. @#

---------------

dates: ['2017-08-13', '1988']
datePublished: 2017-09-08 00:00:00
Date Published:2017-09-08 00:00:00 Can dams actually prevent floods in Bangladesh? Bangladesh Water Development Board (BWDB) has constructed over 15,000 kilometres of embankments and town protection dams all over the country. In the 2015-16 fiscal year, this organisation spent 56.4 percent of its annual budget of BDT 2858.90 crore for the protection of river banks, which included the construction and maintenance of embankments and dams. However, these embankments and dams proved largely ineffective when they were put to the test against this year's flood. For instance, Kurigram district, through which three of the major rivers and 12 of their tributaries flow, was guarded by a 210-kilometre-long embankment. However, 23 kilometres of this embankment have been completely washed away, and more than 60 percent of it has been severely damaged. In total, 280 kilometres of embankment have been damaged and 35 kilometres have been wiped out by the recent floods in the rest of the northern districts. Sarwar Hossain, a local inhabitant of the Kundal area of Nilphamari's Syedpur upazila, says, "On August 13, at around 11 am, we heard a loud bang from the Patwaripara area. We headed there and found that the dam was demolished and water was rushing in violently." As the other parts of the dam were about to collapse as well, Sarwar and other locals hastily tried to repair the dam with mud. Army engineers came to assist and reinforced part of the dam by installing sandbags. As they were repairing the Patwaripara section of the dam, another 100-metre-long section of the structure near Basuniapara suddenly collapsed. "As the dam collapsed, we realised that we had no chance of survival. We fled from our houses with whatever we could take. Many of my neighbours lost their livestock and other valuables. I took my wife, my two children, and several thousand takas only," says Sarwar. According to local inhabitants, the reason behind this otherwise preventable deluge is the lack of maintenance. In fact, Shafiqul Islam, Executive Engineer of BWDB stationed in Kurigram, admitted that 2005 and 2006 were the last times major maintenance work was done on the embankments. On top of that, last year's flood decimated a large part of the embankment, but initiative to restore the damaged section was only taken when the waters of the Brahmaputra and Teesta started to flow well above the danger line. However, it proved too little and too late. BWDB officials say that due to limited budgets, it usually repairs and reinforces embankments as a response to flood warnings and the demands of locals. "We know better now after this year's flood; we are planning to launch large-scale continuous embankment maintenance projects. We have also gotten permission to recruit 1000 more people. However, we cannot promise there will be no flood next year. Flood control is actually a long-term process," says Mahfuzur Rahman, Director General of BWDB. However, this organisation's efforts to control floods with embankments has proved quite ineffective in many cases due to flawed construction and lack of maintenance. For instance, the Chouhali upazila dam, which cost over BDT 100 crore and took BWDB two years to construct, collapsed two times within six months. According to Dr M A Matin, Professor of Water Resource Engineering Department of Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology, says, "Quality of construction and proper maintenance are the two factors responsible for the premature collapse of the embankments." He argues that if the embankment can withstand an annual flood without collapsing, it can be assumed the design of the embankment is perfect. However, the structure needs regular maintenance, which is one of the biggest challenges in Bangladesh. "Manmade activities like building human settlements on the embankment, digging holes in the embankment for personal interests, and taking away concrete blocks and earth from the embankment for construction work are some of the common practices in Bangladesh which make the embankment very weak and vulnerable," explains Dr Matin. This is why he suggests that the maintenance work of the embankments should include two components: one, repairing the embankments, and two, creating awareness among local people of the significance of this protective structure. In regard to this, Rahman argues that guarding the embankment to protect it from manmade activities is not possible for BWDB due to limited resources. He says, "We cannot guard every section of this massive network. We have a limited budget for maintenance and a workforce of some 6000 men to perform such huge tasks." Considering these challenges of regular maintenance and resource constraints, experts suggested an alternative method of flood control 28 years ago after the deluge of 1988. In 1989, the Flood Action Plan of Bangladesh proposed a method called compartmentalisation. According to Dr Matin, "Compartmentalisation involves receiving flood waters, then preserving it through enclosed embankments, and finally distributing it through channels in a regulated way to all parts of the country to minimise the impact of flood without negating its contribution to our agriculture." This method was proposed keeping in mind the inevitability of floods in Bangladesh due to its geographical location, its people's natural ability to cope with flood, and the beneficial impact of flooding in enhancing the fertility of agricultural lands. However, BWDB claims that implementation of compartmentalisation has recently faced serious challenges as it requires the availability of floodplains for regulated flooding, which has decreased significantly over the last 20 years. "Human settlements have occupied most of the floodplains. Urban dwellers do not want any type of flooding, whether regulated or natural. Even our farmers do not want flooding nowadays. They can improve the fertility of their lands by using manure and irrigating with river- and ground-water. So, we have now discarded the compartmentalisation method and gone back to building embankments," says Rahman. During the 1960s, the erstwhile Pakistani government prepared the first Master Plan for water management, which focused mostly on flood control through embankments and drainage improvements. Since then, Bangladesh's flood control system has not seen much progress. Failed initiatives like compartmentalisation and the frequent collapse of embankments have already cost us a vast amount of state resources and human lives. On the other hand, the trend of annual flooding clearly shows the growing intensity of floods in Bangladesh and its devastating impact on the country's agriculture-based economy. Without developing a cost-effective and sustainable flood control system as soon as possible, it will not be possible for Bangladesh to keep its wheels of economic growth in motion for long. Read the other half of this week's Spotlight: Statistics related to floods and cyclones display a dramatic increase in intensity The writer can be contacted at shahnawaz.khan@thedailystar.net. @#

---------------

dates: ['2019-09-01', None, None, None, None, None, None, None, None, None, None, '1998', None, None]
datePublished: 2019-09-29 00:00:00
Date Published:2019-09-29 00:00:00      
A large number of houses, structures, trees, and crops on vast tracts of land were washed away by floodwaters, and strong river currents in different flood-hit areas The overall flood situation remained unchanged, but river erosion has taken a serious turn in Rajbari, and Shariatpur districts on Sunday . Local sources said erosion by Padma River has intensified in Rajbari, and is gradually receding in Shariatpur, causing immense sufferings to the people. A large number of houses, structures, trees, and crops on vast tracts of land were washed away by floodwaters, and strong river currents in different flood-hit areas. In Rajbari, erosion in the Padma River has taken an alarming turn, it already forced thousands of families, under the Sadar, Goalanda, and Kalukhali upazila, to leave their houses, due to rise in water levels, villages within the district are becoming more vulnerable. According to Bangladesh Water Development Board (BWDB), they are dumping sand bags in the river to prevent erosion in the area. But locals claimed that BWDB's efforts aren't enough as forceful current, and rising water level is washing the sand bags away. They hoped the authority would take more effective measures to prevent erosion, which eroded at least 19 points of the district. Goalanda's Bhakla Union Parishad Chairman Md Amjad Hossain said: "Not only the houses, but acres of croplands are underwater. BWDB initiatives are praiseworthy, but not enough to avert the erosion."  Arifur Rahman Angkur, Sub-Divisional Engineer BWDB's Rajbari office, said: "We are dumping Geo bags to lessen the casualties. We will take more measures if needed." In Shariatpur, at least 20 establishments, including a mosque, 5 business centres, and houses were devoured by the Padma River, and it is threatening more areas in Naria upazila of Shariatpur district due to a wild rise in water level, causing severe river erosion in the past couple of days. Around 200 meters of the river protection dam has collapsed in the district on Thursday, making hundreds of residents, around the riverbank, to shift from the spot instantly. Locals said, the water level of the Padma was increasing since Thursday but has receded on Sunday.  Member of Parliament (MP), Deputy Minister for Water Resources AKM Enamul Haque Shamim, State Minister Zahid Faruque, and Director General of Bangladesh Water Development Board (BWDB) Mahfuzur Rahman, visited the area Sunday. They said there was no negligence with the construction of the protection dam. The damage was a result of increased current, and rise of water level in the river. It is to be noted that last year, more than 6,000 houses, around 1,000 business centres, and many other establishments were washed away due to devastating erosion of the Padma River in Naria upazila.

---------------

dates: ['2016-07-25']
datePublished: 2016-08-03 00:00:00
Date Published:2016-08-03 00:00:00 Floodwaters continued to recede yesterday in the country's north and northeast, leaving trails of massive damages to crops, houses, roads and dykes. Many flood victims were still living on embankments or government shelter centres while some started returning to damaged homes. Visiting Jamalpur in the last three days, photojournalist Amran Hossain of The Daily Star saw huge low-lying areas with aman seedlings, fish and vegetables affected by flooding. "After harvesting, farmers immerse jute plants in water bodies for rotting, but a good portion of the crop has been washed away by floodwaters," he said. Some 25 families took shelter at Jarultala Govt Primary School flood shelter centre in Islampur union on July 25. They alleged the government did not supply any relief aid to them. On July 31, some locals gave them some rotis only. Having lost crops and fish, farmers were worried about the coming months. Osimuddin Miah, a farmer in Lalmonirhat Sadar upazila, lost aman paddy on 1.66 acres of land to flooding. "I borrowed Tk 20,000 from an NGO for cultivating aman, but the floods have ruined everything," he said yesterday after returning home along with his five-member family from an embankment. The 62-year-old had no idea about how he would repay the loan, go for growing another crop and repair the house, reports our Lalmonirhat correspondent. Mofazzal Hossain, 56, a farmer at Shiberkuti village, could not buy aman seedlings as the prices were high. "If the govt doesn't provide necessary support, we won't be able to grow aman paddy," he said, adding that it would ultimately have an adverse impact on their livelihood. Fish farmer Mohammad Ali in Melandah upazila of Jamalpur said he spent Tk 10 lakh for farming in two ponds, but the total investment is lost due to flooding. As of yesterday, crops on 1.07 lakh hectares in 23 districts have been inundated by floodwaters, according to Department of Agricultural Extension (DAE). The DAE would make a complete assessment of the damages after the flood is over. Based on the assessment, the government would decide on how to help the affected farmers, DAE Director General Md Hamidur Rahman told The Daily Star. The government would ensure availability of paddy seedlings and vegetable seeds so that farmers can resume cultivation after the subsidence of floodwaters, he added. According to the Department of Disaster Management, at least 6,34,409 families in the country's 16 districts, mostly in the north and northeast, have been hit by flooding since mid-July. The deluge killed 21 people and fully damaged some 8,140 houses. Some 2,000 km of roads and 58.09 km of embankments in Jamalpur; seven km of roads in Nilphamari; 327 km of roads in Sirajganj and 300 metres of dykes in Gaibandha were damaged fully or partially. Disaster Management and Relief Minister Mofazzal Hossain Chowdhury Maya yesterday said the government would take a 40-day programme to rebuild the damaged houses in low-lying areas. "Immediately after the receding of floodwaters, the government would start rebuilding the damaged homes," he said while distributing relief materials among the victims in Phulbari of Gaibandha. Two hundred more flood shelter centres will be built to protect people from flooding, Maya added. Meanwhile, water levels in the Buriganga, Turag, Balu and Shitalakhya around the capital are rising and the trend might continue in next 24 hours, according to Flood Forecasting and Warning Centre (FFWC). "There is no possibility of flooding in northern and western areas of Dhaka. But the low-lying areas in the east might see flooding," said Ripon Karmaker, assistant engineer of FFWC. @#

---------------

dates: [None, None, None, '2019-07-01']
datePublished: 2019-08-08 00:00:00
Date Published:2019-08-08 00:00:00      
Residents of at least 30 villages living close to Monu River embankments in Kulaura upazila of Moulvibazar are at risk as the river has once again begun to erode the banks in Koterkuna area. The erosion of the river bank began on last Thursday, causing suspension of vehicle movement on Koterkuna-Hazipur road for one week, reports our Moulvibazar correspondent. Local people fear that the embankment may collapse any moment as a crack in it keeps widening. Earlier, the river damaged the embankment in the first week of last month. According to local sources, the Bangladesh Water Development Board (BWDB) repaired the crack with wooden pillars and sand sack structures in an attempt to curb damage from the escalating erosion, but the repair works failed to contain the river and were washed away in last few days. Ali Hosain, a resident of Koterkuna village, said that due to heavy rains for the last one month the flood control embankment at Koterkuna area got damaged twice. Persistent rains and water from the upstream hills have turned the river dangerous, he said. "I have two acres of land near the embankment and I run my family with the income from selling the crops. I won't be able to maintain our livelihood if the embankment collapses," said Sadhon Das, a resident of Monu village. Abdus Salek, a farmer of the same village, said erosion also hit the embankment last year and villagers contained the damage by erecting corrugated iron fences and dumping sand bags. The locals also demanded alternative road for the 30 villages as vehicles movement on the Hazipur-Koterkuna road get suspended every time the embankment is damaged, This important embankment has been facing erosion threat due to mindless sand lifting by a section of local influential people, locals alleged. "How can we celebrate Eid when we are tensed if the embankment collapses again? If it will collapse in Eid time then we will lose all our assets and crops," said Nargis Banu, a resident of Monu village. Hazipur Union Parishad Chairman Abdul Bachhit Bacchu said the 30 villages near the embankment and the Koterkuna market will not survive if action is not taken immediately. "We have marked 67 points in the Sadar, Kulaura, and Rajnagar upazilas which are at risk due to river erosion," BWDB Executive Engineer Ranendra Shankar Chakrabarti said "A Tk 1,000 crore development project will soon be proposed to build permanent boundaries around the river embankments which will contain the river waters in the rainy season," he added.

---------------

dates: ['2018-08-07']
datePublished: 2018-08-15 00:00:00
Date Published:2018-08-15 00:00:00 On August 7, a large part of Sadhur Bazar, located near the Padma River, suddenly collapsed around 2pm The body of a man has been found seven days after he was reported missing in the Padma river on August 7. The body of Al Amin, 27, was found in Meghnarchar, near the Haimchar area of Chandpur district on Monday. Nine others remain missing in Zajira and Naria upazilas of Shariatpur. On August 7, a large part of Sadhur Bazar, located near the Padma River, suddenly collapsed around 2pm. The sudden erosion initially washed away 29 people around a week ago, but 19 among them were rescued later, confirmed by Naria Upazila Nirbahi Officer Sanjida Yasmin and Naria police station OC Aslamuddin. The missing people are Shahjahan Bepari, 70, Mujibur Rahman Chhoiyal, 45, Gopi Bachhar, 55, Nasir Boyati, 18, Mosharrof Chokdar, 46, Nasir Hawladar, 35, Kamal Uddin Chhoiyal, 62, Antu Mogdom, 15, Abdur Rashid Hawladar, 36. The wife of a missing person named Mujibur Chhoiyal, Rabeya Begum said: "My husband was a businessman. He was in the area during the sudden erosion. He has been missing since then." At least 1,000 people have lost their homes and belongings in the erosion. Many educational institutes along with Upazila Parishad and Upazila Health Complex are at the risk of being washed away by the erosion. Naria's municipality Mayor Md Shahidul Islam Babu Rari claimed that about 80% of the houses, in ward 2 and 4 of his municipality have been consumed by the erosion. He also said that it happened because of the negligence of the Water Development Board. Police and fire service personnel are still searching for the missing people. Commenting in the matter, DWDB Shariatpur Executive Engineer Md Shafiqul Islam said: "Bangladesh Navy Institute Khulna ship yard has submitted tender for the construction of a stable defense dam surrounding an area of 8.9 km." He also said that the construction work will commence after the cabinet has assessed and approved the tender. The government had allocated Tk1,097 crore to build an embankment from Zajira's Kundarchar to Naria's Sureshwar on January 2 this year. However, Water Development Board sources told the Dhaka Tribune that construction of the proposed embankment will not start until the next dry season. Last year on September 11 at 5am in the morning, three launches anchored in the same area fell victim to the erosion and 16 people went missing. After a few days, two of the dead bodies were found. @#

---------------

dates: ['1988-08-25', None, None, None, None, None, None]
datePublished: 1988-09-18T05:00:00.000Z
In Bangladesh, Too Much Water and Not Enough
1988-09-18T05:00:00.000Z
With two jerrycans in hand, Muklesha Khatun waited impatiently for about four hours for the water trucks to arrive, and finally took home her allotted daily quota, two gallons.
''I have to make do with these two pots for my entire family of five,'' Mrs. Khatun said, ''but in a way I'm thankful to Allah that we're still getting it.''
Mrs. Khatun, 45 years old, is one of about 30,000 residents of the overcrowded, low-lying neighborhood of Mugdapara here in the capital who have been at the mercy of such erratic water deliveries since Bangladesh was inundated with widespread flooding late last month. It is estimated that at least a third of the capital's five million people have been without regular water supplies because of the flooding.
With reservoir tanks and pumping stations submerged in many areas, hundreds of thousands of people are now dependent on drinking water brought from outside. The water and sewerage authority and political and volunteer organizations have mounted a major operation to bring drinking water to the affected areas, but, as Mrs. Khatun's experience shows, their efforts sometimes fall short.
Much of the country is still under water. The Government says that 935 people have died in the flooding, but its count is generally considered too low, and Dhaka newspapers put the toll at more than 1,800. The Health Ministry says that about 220,000 people are suffering from gastrointestinal diseases like diarrhea and dysentery as a result of the flooding, and that 185 people have died from such diseases. [ Railroad service from Dhaka to Chittagong, the main port, and Sylhet, the business center, has been restored after repairs to a railroad bridge outside the capital, Reuters reported. The bridge was washed away two weeks ago in the flooding. ] Getting water to Mugdapara, Mrs. Khatun's neighborhood, is an arduous and time-consuming exercise.
Volunteers of the Family Planning Association of Bangladesh must first negotiate by rickshaw through waterlogged roads to reach the municipal pumping station, where their drums are filled. The drums are taken by pickup truck for a distance, but transferred again to rickshaws for delivery through streets where the water is still too deep. A stretch of mud has to be covered by men who carry the drums on their heads. Finally, when the drums reach the neighborhood, they are loaded onto boats that set off down serpentine lanes and bylanes to the community center, where the family planning association has set up its distribution camp.
''It's a killing job,'' said Kazi Anisur Rahman, secretary general of the association. ''We spend nearly two hours to deliver five drums to this area less than three miles from our headquarters.'' Land for Dead and Living
The wan smile never left Nuruddin Mia's face as he wearily maneuvered his boat past submerged trees and houses under a blazing sun, on his way to Paschimgaon, a village of about 5,000 people 12 miles southwest of Dhaka.
For 30 years, Mr. Mia, who is from the village, has been ferrying people to and from the village of Demraghat three miles away. His route is the Balu River, which in the flooding has become a huge lake stretching as far as the eye can see.
''Never, ever have I heard or seen such a flood and horror in my life,'' said Mr. Mia, who is 46. ''There's not a single house in this area that has escaped its wrath.''
His own house has been inundated by waist-deep water and looks as if it might crumble at any moment.
Mr. Mia and his 18-year-old son, Sohrab Hossain, spend nights in the boat. The other five members of his family sleep on the tin roof of the house, exposed to the elements. ''My own nephew, born 20 days ago, died of cold, and there is no doctor here who could be consulted with,'' he said.
He said the family had a hard time finding a dry spot where the body could be buried. ''Ultimately we took him to an adjoining area where a small parcel of land was found and we buried him there,'' he said.
The parcel holding the burial site is also haven for at least 200 people, mostly women and children huddling together with cattle, ducks and chickens.
''This flood has leveled everybody -rich and poor, high and low,'' said Janab Ali Matbar, 65, the village headman. 'Living Like Animals'
In another neighborhood, 30 minutes ride by boat, an incomplete two-story rural health center converted into a relief camp houses more than 300 men, women and children. Of the four toilets in the building, two in the ground floor are under water, so many of those taking refuge in the building relieve themselves in the surrounding flood water. Many people were seen bathing and washing in the contaminated water.
''You can't really call it life,'' said Rafiqul Islam Khandker, 40, who is in charge of the camp and who is also the headmaster of the local high school. ''They're living like animals.'' Still, many of those in the center appeared grateful to have found a place where one meal is provided daily, since they are extremely poor even in their normal circumstances.
Mr. Khandker said that there have been surprisingly few cases of diarrhea, dysentery and flu, diseases normally inevitable in such conditions.
''There's no death yet due to these diseases,'' Mr. Khandker said.
Azimul Baki, a rural health assistant, interjected: ''If there is any, we simply have to put the dead on a makeshift raft for lack of dry space for burial.''

---------------

dates: [None, '1988-08-01', None]
datePublished: 1988-12-25T05:00:00.000Z
THE WORLD; A Guide to Some of the Scariest Things on Earth
1988-12-25T05:00:00.000Z
Here is a sampling of what environmentalists considered some of the worst problems in 1988. Canada
1. Relations between the United States and Canada came under increasing strain this year because of acid rain. Scientists say that sulfur dioxide from industries in the United States continues to kill aquatic life in hundreds of lakes in the Adirondack Mountains and in other parts of the Northeast and Canada. United States
2. Four decades of nuclear weapon production has polluted the air, soil and water at 16 plants and research laboratories in the United States. The contaminants include uranium, plutonium, cesium, strontium, PCB's, chromium, arsenic, mercury and solvents used in making nuclear weapons. Carcinogens leaking into an underground water reservoir from the Rocky Flats Plant north of Denver was ranked as the worst problem. Mexico City
3. Air pollution is so bad in the Mexico City area, where 20 million people live, that all schools will be closed next month so that children can stay indoors and reduce their exposure. Winter temperature inversions trap ozone, carbon monoxide, sulfur dioxide, nitrogen dioxide, lead, mercury and other pollutants, most of them generated by the city's three million cars, trucks and buses. The result is a rise in respiratory problems, fatigue, nausea and headaches. Brazil
4. Fires used to clear land for agriculture and ranching in the Amazon destroyed 30,000 square miles of virgin forest last year, an area the size of Maine. The burning is so extensive that it may account for one-tenth of the global man-made production of carbon dioxide, one of the gases believed to cause the greenhouse effect. Millions of tons of methane and nitrogen oxides generated each year by the fires may help erode the earth's protective ozone shield. Adriatic Sea
5. This summer the Adriatic, like many other parts of the world, suffered an outbreak of algae. Fed by phosphates and other pollutants, the algae starved the water of oxygen, killing fish in a 1,000-mile stretch along the Italian coast. Bangladesh
6. Tree cutting, overgrazing and agricultural erosion in the Himalayan watershed make Bangladesh's monsoons increasingly disastrous. In August mountain runoff helped swell the Ganges River, flooding the country and killing 1,200 people. Africa
7. Drought and erosion from farming, grazing and wood gathering are helping the Sahara to advance as much as 3 1/2 miles a year into the sub-Saharan region of northwestern Africa. Erosion is also bad in the Ethiopian highlands, the headwaters of the Blue Nile, where a burgeoning population is stripping the hillsides bare. Environmentalists say that the destruction of the watershed considerably worsened a flood last summer in the Sudan that left at least 1.5. million people homeless. Antarctic Ozone Hole
8. Last December the Antarctic ozone hole that appears each winter may have reached Australia, where scientists reported a 10 percent thinning of the earth's protective shield. Problems are also believed to occur as far north as Santiago and Buenos Aires. Ozone in the upper atmosphere filters out ultraviolet light, which causes skin cancer and might depress the immune system. It can also kill phytoplankton, the microscopic organisms at the bottom of the aquatic food chain. Eastern Europe
9. Unregulated industry has turned parts of Eastern Europe into an ecological wasteland. Acid rain is killing trees in Poland, East Germany and Czechoslovakia. Pollution is blamed for cancer and mental retardation. Philippines
10. As much as 95 percent of the coral reefs in the Philippines have been damaged by cyanide, which fishermen dump in the water to scare fish to the surface. As in other rapidly developing areas of Southeast Asia, logging and slash-and-burn agriculture consumes tens of thousands of acres of trees each year on the island of Palawan, the nation's last frontier. China
11. It is not known whether the droughts in China and the United States were related to the greenhouse effect, but environmentalists say this summer could be a preview of hotter times to come. China already suffers water shortages and pollution from farming and industry. Aral Sea
12. Diverting water to irrigate cotton has caused the Aral Sea to shrink 40 percent since 1960, leaving behind a vast desert waste. Twenty of the 24 native fish species are gone and dust and salt storms are killing crops. Chernobyl
13. More than two and a half years after an explosion at a nuclear power plant killed 31 people and forced the evacuation of 135,000, Soviet officials and scientists are debating what to do with the ghost town of Chernobyl: demolish it or decontaminate it and allow its 10,000 inhabitants to return. Hundreds of thousands of Soviet citizens are being monitored for long-term health effects like leukemia.

---------------

dates: ['2016-08-20']
datePublished: 2016-12-20 00:00:00
Date Published:2016-12-20 00:00:00 Bhabadah, often called the "Sorrow of Jessore", where water is a symbol of suffering, hunger, disease, and death. The perennial waterlogging triggered from Bhabadah point affects mainly three upazilas -- Abhaynagar, Manirampur and Keshabpur -- home to some 10 lakh people. This year, almost six lakh inhabitants were affected when the flood situation was at its worst during the rainy season. Five months later, things have improved but many farmers won't still be able to grow crops. But what's the cause of Bhabadah's woes? Is there no solution? There is. Why is it not happening then? In this two-part story, WASIM BIN HABIB and TUHIN SHUBHRA ADHIKARY chronicle Bhabadah's saga at a time when, with much of the vast land still under this year's floodwaters, many beel people are wondering how they will prepare for the next rain. On a pale October afternoon, Hari Chand Mandal was gazing at Beel Bokor, one of the 27 major beels in Bhabadah. As he sat on the bank of the vast, black wetland, a soft autumn breeze made ripples on its surface. But Hari, 40, showed no interest in the wavelets. He had another, more pressing thought. "I won't be able to grow Boro paddy on my land this year for sure," said the marginal farmer from Mashiahati Uttar Para of Abhaynagar in Jessore. Farmers in other parts of the country have already started cultivating Boro rice, but those in Abhaynagar, Manirampur and Keshabpur upazilas see a grim prospect. Five months after the rainy season ended in July, some of their croplands still remain submerged by knee to waist-deep waters. Just two months ago, Hari's life was full of miseries. With his elderly parents, wife and college-going son, he took shelter in a hut he built on a road, after the entire village went under waist-high waters following a heavy rain in mid-August (424mm or about 17 inches of rain in just three days -- August 10, 11 and 20). Until mid-October, hundreds of families, including his, lived in such shacks and ate whatever food they had managed to store during dry season. The floodwaters now have receded from most homesteads, but not from their farmlands. "If the water stays a few more months, we will have to go unfed," Hari told The Daily Star in late October. His anxiety is shared by thousands of families in the three upazilas known as Bhabadah area, between Jessore and Khulna in southern Bangladesh. The area is crisscrossed by seven main rivers -- the Mukteshwari, Teka, Hari, Sree, Aparbhadra, Harihar and Buribhadra -- and many canals. Aptly called the "Sorrow of Jessore," much of Bhabadah remains inundated for months during rain almost every year. This year, about 600,000 people in 286 villages have been affected in various degrees, according to Bangladesh Water Development Board (BWDB) officials in Jessore. With all the rivers and canals silted up over the last three decades, the rain waters have nowhere to go now. So they get trapped in these beels, submerging homesteads, farmlands, roads and educational institutions. When the waterlogging is at its worst, normal life comes to a standstill in these beels spreading over 487 square kilometres. There is hardly any work. Living space becomes so scarce that sometimes a whole family shares a single room with their cattle. Others sell out their domestic animals at nominal prices. Water gets contaminated, causing various skin and water-borne diseases. Fishes die. Sometimes water snakes, frogs and other poisonous bugs, looking for a dry place, enter their huts, creating panic. This year, at least 11 people, mostly children, drowned or died from snake bites, media reports said citing government officials. Angered and shocked, hundreds of Bhabadah people travelled to Noapara, some 10km away, on October 5 to take to the streets, demanding government action. They were met with police action instead, in which some 50 people, including women and elderly campaigners, were injured. Bhabadah's waterlogging problem began in the early 1980s when all its rivers started drying up, after the construction of costal embankments and sluice gates in the region. The embankments and sluice gates were built to prevent saline water from intruding into the beels. The saline water stopped, and so did the natural flow of currents in the process. Successive governments have taken up various projects worth hundreds of crores of taka to solve this, but they only brought brief relief. Many of the projects were faulty. But more than that, every time the government initiated any projects, powerful locals blocked those to protect their interests, including the multi-million dollar shrimp farms. This year, the problem turned acute. In the last three years, nothing was done to keep the rivers navigable. So when the entire area went under water, the BWDB installed an excavator to flush out waters by making a channel on the Hari river on August 30. It was too little too late. Before this temporary measure could have an impact, some 73,400 hectres of land went under water. As a result, all of Bhabadah's 15,000 hectres of Aus and Aman farmland were damaged and some 300 schools and colleges had to stop educational activities for about a month, officials said. Last month, local MP Shawpan Bhattacharjee estimated farmers won't be able to grow crops on half their land this Boro season. Contacted on Sunday, Emdad Hossain Sheikh, deputy director of the Department of Agriculture Extension in Jessore, admitted some croplands were still under water. However, farmers would be able to cultivate their land by pumping out the water by shallow pumps. But farmers and a local journalist who visited two beels on Sunday said that would be extremely difficult, even impossible, for many given the height of the water. When The Daily Star visited the affected areas in Abhaynagar and Manirampur in late October, some families were still marooned in their shabby huts with waters all around. Many were still living on the roads while many others were repairing their badly damaged houses. As floodwaters devoured her earthen house in Digholiya village in Abhaynaga's Paira union, Nurjahan, a 43-year-old widow, sent her grandchildren to her sister's in Noapara. Her two sons made a six by seven feet hut with bamboo and straw on a road. There, she lived with her sons and their wives for two months. She kept her cattle inside her hut. "The life we lived was not at all a human life," she said. Drinking water was scarce; there were no proper toilets, only makeshift ones built on roads. Women used those mostly at night; many drank little water during day to avoid going to toilets. People struggled to take the sick to hospitals or bury their dead. "There was water everywhere. We buried our sister-in-law in another village, three kilometres from ours," said Abdul Wahab Majumdar, also from Digholiya. But those that still live are trapped; they have nowhere to go. Thousands, if not lakhs, of marginal farmers, day labourers, small vendors have had little income for the past four months. By now, they have run out of their savings and food stocks. As they count their losses -- livelihoods, homes, loved ones -- floodwaters in some beels are showing little sign of receding from their farmlands, and it's not clear when they will be able to work again and start a normal life. Bhabadah's deep-seated waterlogging problem has its origin in the 1960s. The region had a different problem then. This low-lying area would be inundated during rain by the rising waters of the major rivers that crisscross this marshy land before falling into the Bay of Bengal about 60km to its south. This extremely saline water posed a serious threat to crops, cattle, fish and human alike. So the then Pakistan government took up a huge project funded by the Asian Development Bank and assisted by the USAID. Under this Coastal Embankment Project, around 1,500 kilometres of embankments, 282 sluice gates and some 35 polders were constructed along the rivers from 1961 to 1967. On the Sree river alone, a 21-vent sluice gate was built at Bhabadah point to turn the vast swamps into arable land. Initially, the project was a hit; the area saw a bumper food production, said Jahangir Alam, member of the executive committee of Bangladesh Economic Association, who has been working on the waterlogging issue for years. Farmers were so happy that they gave Abdul Monem Khan, the then governor of East Pakistan, a "gold scythe" as a gift, said Jahangir, who wrote a research paper on the problem and its solution. But the whole project turned out to be a catastrophe within two decades. Before the polders were built to trap the saline water, tides used to flow inland, depositing sediments at high tide, creating a balance with the natural land subsidence. Polders (a Dutch word) are a low-lying tract of land enclosed by dikes that forms an artificial waterbody. They have no connections with outside water other than through manually operated devices. However, after the construction of the embankments, sluice gates and polders, silt started to deposit on the riverbeds, while subsidence of the land within the polders continued. The natural process of land formation inside the polders came to a halt in the 1980s. At the same time, currents in the upstream rivers -- mainly the Padma (Ganges in India) and its tributaries, particularly Bhairab which flows through Abhaynagar -- grew weak after India built the Farakka Embankment on the Ganges and started withdrawing water in the 1970s, said Prof M Shahjahan Mondal of the Institute of Water and Flood Management at the Buet. In addition, the Coastal Embankment Project did not pay attention to silt management and so there was no long-term plan for river dredging in the area to clear the deposited silt. As a result, currents of these rivers lost force and the rivers started drying up and eventually the exit points of the sluice gates got blocked. "In fact that [the embankment project] was the beginning of the ever-present calamity for the people, environment and nature," said Iqbal Kabir Jahid, chief adviser of Bhabadah Pani Nishkashon Sangram Committee, a platform campaigning for a solution for over a decade. @#

---------------

dates: ['1988-08-01', None]
datePublished: 1988-09-13T05:00:00.000Z
WASHINGTON TALK: AIDING DISASTER VICTIMS; Small Agency Helps a Great Power Lighten Human Suffering
1988-09-13T05:00:00.000Z
When the devastation and human misery are so large - 25 million Bangladeshis homeless from floods covering an area almost three times the size of New Jersey - the generous efforts of even the richest friend may seem minuscule.
The way Washington responds to dozens of international disasters each year is nonetheless a highly refined but free-wheeling process that invariably manages to gather resources to make a difference in even the most overwhelming circumstances.
The main coordination is supplied by a small band of 21 full-time people who make up the Office of United States Foreign Disaster Assistance, a part of the Agency for International Development that is housed in a first-floor corner of the State Department.
It is there, usually around a gray, horseshoe-shaped battery of desks and telephones in its operations center, that daily life and death decisions are made to deploy the planes that carry all manner of relief to victims almost anywhere in the world. Intensity Is Normal
Despite Bangladesh's enormous needs, activity these days is said to be only somewhat more intense than usual.
''We're working 16 disasters right now,'' Julia V. Taft, the harried but unfailingly courteous dynamo who has run the O.F.D.A. since early 1986, said on Thursday as she prepared for the 3 P.M. Bangladesh strategy session. ''We are just busting ourselves.''
Since Sept. 1, when Bangladesh was officially declared a disaster - a life-threatening situation beyond the ability of the victims' government to handle - five other disasters have been added to the O.F.D.A.'s list. These little publicized tragedies, bringing the total to a record-tying 54 for the office this year, involve floods in the Dominican Republic, insect infestation in Ethiopia, floods in Niger, displaced people in Burundi and floods in India.
The job of Mrs. Taft and her staff, which includes some former members of the Peace Corps, is to identify, with the help of A.I.D. missions and American embassies, the need for help and to coordinate the Federal Government's response. This generally also involves liaison with private voluntary organizations like CARE and the Save the Children Fund that have a a permanent presence in stricken countries. 'The Focal Point'
''They're the focal point,'' said Robert J. McCloskey, a former State Department official and Ambassador who is now Washington representative for Catholic Relief Services, which has contributed $300,000 so far through its Caritas Bangladesh affiliate.
Joy Carol, director of Save the Children's Asia-Pacific region, said that even when her group acts on its own, perhaps before the Government can mount an airlift, ''we always report immediately'' to the State Department office as to what has been done.
The office also keeps track of what other countries and international organizations are doing. Saudi Arabia and India, for example, were listed on a situation report last week as having lent four helicopters each to the Bangladesh relief effort, and Japan was shown as pledging $13 million for food and transportation.
Mrs. Taft seems a master at marshaling the vast Government resources at her disposal. She is a veteran relief worker; in the 1970's she was director of the Interagency Task Force for Indochina Refugees based in the State Department, and has also worked in this field at the Pentagon. In addition to the Defense Department, the office has close ties with the Centers for Disease Control, the Forest Service and its A.I.D. sister unit, the Bureau for Food for Peace. Response on Same Day
The Government's first cash donation to this year's victims of monsoon rains and subsequent flooding came the same day that Bangladesh's President, H.M. Ershad, made his international appeal for help. Willard A. DePree, the United States Ambassador in Dhaka, exercising his disaster-assistance authority, released $25,000 for the President's emergency fund. The O.F.D.A. quickly added a $40,000 grant to Save the Children, $50,000 to CARE, $132,000 to World Vision and $1.1 million to two arms of the United Nations. In addition, Food for Peace released 10,000 tons of ''food-for-work'' program wheat from Bangladesh stocks, the grain and transport for it valued at about $2.5 million.
Meanwhile, Mrs. Taft and her staff had begun planning for the first shipments of goods to Bangladesh, on a giant Air Force C-5A crammed with supplies drawn mainly from a depot at New Windsor, Md., one of the O.F.D.A.'s six stockpiles. The others are in Panama, Guam, Singapore, and Pisa, Italy. There is also a cache of survival kits and communications equipment at headquarters.
This cargo plane, loaded at Dover Air Force Base in Delaware and Andrews Air Force Base in suburban Washington, left Friday night and arrived, with the aid of midair refuelings, in Bangladesh today after a layover in Japan. The airport in Dhaka was reopened only late last week.
In the shipment were 850 rolls, or 2.2 million square feet, of plastic sheeting for shelter; 10,000 collapsible five-gallon water jugs; 26 water storage tanks, each with a 3,000-gallon capacity, and two water purifier systems, each with an operator to run it and to train Bangladeshis in its use. A Three-Week Stay
A dozen other Americans from various agencies were on the plane, including Jay F. Morris, the Deputy Administrator of A.I.D. All but Mr. Morris are to remain in Bangladesh least three weeks.
''The marching orders are to do everything we can,'' Mrs. Taft said.
Later this week, a second plane, a C-141, will leave Panama with more American equipment for Bangladesh, including six large fiberglass boats with 40-horsepower engines, 150 large tents and 10,000 blankets. Some equipment will be picked up en route at a Defense Department depot on Okinawa.
The O.F.D.A. flights generally do not carry privately donated goods, which on some occasions, including the 1985 Mexican earthquake, have proven more a hindrance than a help.
''Some people clean out their closets with lots of junk, and the important stuff doesn't get through,'' said Mrs. Taft.
Although the O.F.D.A. has more financial latitude than most agencies - Congress is a good bet to approve a compelling special request even in the budget-conscious era - it has resources, including borrowings from A.I.D. accounts, other than budgetary appropriations. For example, Mr. Morris and his staff will seek to ''reprogram'' some $84 million built up in Bangladeshi currency under a program by which American food is given to that country for local sale. Tries to Avoid Politics
The disaster office, which in the 1987 fiscal year administered $25.7 million in emergency assistance involving 54 situations, spent another $4.1 million for various programs to mitigate hazards, to improve warning systems and otherwise to prepare for disruptions.
In 1986, because of the famine in Ethiopia, the office presided over a record-shattering $130 million in aid.
Mrs. Taft, although appointed to her post by the President, is careful to keep her office free from both international politics - the United States need not have diplomatic relations with a country to offer aid -and domestic partisanship. The latter, however, doesn't prevent her on occasion from discussing things with her husband, William Howard Taft 4th, a deputy Secretary of Defense and a prominent member of the Administration.
The department, she says, has traditionally paid ''special attention'' to the needs of the disaster office, but she on occasion plays the spouse card as well to obtain transportation and other support. ''I think it may help -a little bit,'' Mrs. Taft said.

---------------

dates: ['2017-08-09']
datePublished: 2017-08-19 00:00:00
Date Published:2017-08-19 00:00:00 Even though the water levels in some of the major rivers in the northern and central districts -- Teesta, Dharla and Jamuna -- continue to recede, the sufferings of the flood victims show no signs of easing. However, floodwater submerged new areas in Natore while ongoing mid-term examinations of primary schools in all upazilas in Manikganj except for Singair have been postponed due to flood. In Lalmonirhat, water levels of both the major rivers --Teesta and Dharla -- have been flowing well below the danger level for the past few days. However, many have been unable to go back to their homes as most of their houses were washed away in the floods, our Lalmonirhat correspondent reports quoting sources at the Deputy Commissioner's office. Even the government allocated relief has been sparse. Of the 1,02, 750 families affected by the floods, only 24,200 received relief so far, Lalmonirhat Deputy Commissioner Shafiul Arif said. In Tangail, as well, the flood situation was improving owing to the receding water levels of the Jamuna River. The water level of the Jamuna river at Tangail point fell 17cm in the last 24 hours. At Bahadurabad point of Jamalpur district, the water of the river reduced by 26cm and at Sirajganj point the water level decreased by 19cm, our Tangail correspondent reports quoting Executive Engineer Shajahan Siraj of Water Development Board. In the wake of the flood, the main concern of authorities is to get adequate relief among the flood-affected people. Although relief distribution is going on in the district, there is not enough, the correspondent reports quoting chairmen of the affected union parishads. In Natore, the overall flood situation in Singra upazila deteriorated today as the water of Atrai river was flowing 70cm above the danger mark, according to UNB. Many flood affected people left their houses for safe shelter. At least seven hectares of Aman paddy have already been damaged by the floodwater. Paddy in 800 bighas of land in Temuk Nowdapara beel went under water last evening as gushing water was entering through a damaged dam in Sidhakhali river. State Minister for Information and Communication Technology (ICT) Junaid Ahmed Palak visited the flood-affected areas in the upazila and distributed relief materials among the victims yesterday. In Manikganj, mid-term examination of primary schools in all upazilas except for Singair were postponed by the district primary education office from August 19 until next order, our Manikganj correspondent reports quoting Aleya Ferdousi Shikha, district primary education officer. More than 200 schools in the affected six upazilas have been declared closed due to floods, she said. The water of the Padma and Jamuna is flowing 72 cm above the danger zone by decreasing 4 cm at Aricha point in Manikganj in last 24 hours, said Executive engineer of Water Development Board (WDB) Hasan Mahmud. On the other side, the water of all internal rivers of the district including Kaliganga, Dhaleshwari, Ichhamoti, Gazikhali, Kantaboti is increasing. The water of Kaliganga is flowing 82 cm above the danger zone by increasing 33 cm at Tora point in the last 24 hours, Hasan Mahmud said. In Dinajpur, although water levels in most of the rivers have been receding in the district, road and rail communications are yet to be restored. As per the government estimate, around 114km roads under Roads and Highways Department (RHD) and around 1,100km roads under of Local Government Engineering Department (LGED) have been damaged due to the ravaging flood, said Masum Sarwar, executive engineer of RHD. Dhaka's rail link with Dinajpur remains suspended over the last seven days as 15km of rail tracks, damaged by the onrush of water, are yet to be repaired, the official said. Meanwhile, the agriculture has also been hit hard as around 1.26 lakh hectares of Aman land have been inundated in floodwaters with fishes of 12,000 ponds washed away, our local correspondent reports quoting district administrations sources. In Kurigram, all rivers except the Brahmaputra are flowing below the danger mark while the Brahmaputra is now flowing 14cm above the danger mark. District administration has so far distributed 1671.38 metric tonnes of rice and Tk 62.55 lakh among the flood victims, our Kurigram correspondent reports quoting Relief and Rehabilitation Officer Enamul Haque. However, a number of flood victims alleged of sparse relief. Nur Islam, 55, of Holokhana union under Sadar upazila, who has taken shelter in a primary school said, "My family has been left starving as we haven't received any relief materials yet." "My children have nothing to eat. We were given only a kg of flattened rice," said Rahena Begum, 35, in RDRS Bazar area of Holokhana union. In Jamalpur, water levels have receded to great extent in the last two days in the district but still the Jamuna is overflowing at 72cm in Jamalpur's Bahadurabad Ghat point. The suffering of over 1.75 lakh flood-hit families of 583 villages in 60 unions of all seven upazilas of the district was still going on for scarcity of food. Meanwhile, Disaster Management and Relief Minister Mofazzal Hossain Chowdhury Maya and State Minister for Textile and Jute Mirza Azam, MP distributed a packet of 10kg rice among 1700 affected families each in Melandah and Islampur upazilas this afternoon. During the relief distribution, a good number of flood-hit people coming from different areas of the upazila, were seen leaving the place with broken hearts, our local correspondent reports. When approached, 30-40 women encircled the correspondent seeking to get their names enlisted so that they could avail the opportunity of having the rice while the relief distribution was going on around 3:00pm. @#

---------------

dates: ['2016-07-28']
datePublished: 2016-08-12 00:00:00
Date Published:2016-08-12 00:00:00 Photos: Amran Hossain During the drier seasons from November to March, anybody visiting the northern districts of Bangladesh will come across a sight that cannot be compared with any other part of the country-- vast sandy plains stretching hundreds of miles resemble more with the desert wilderness of Arabia or the Sahara. And, in the northern districts like Kurigram, Gaibandha or Lalmonirhat, the sand is invading more and more lands. Due to high velocity winds, the sand is taking over the adjacent fertile plains turning huge amounts of land into barren desert every year. However, just from April and onwards, this huge sandy plain turns into a raging inland sea. The furious current washes away everything in its path; monstrous waves destroy each side of the river bank leaving hundreds and thousands of people homeless and destitute. Hundreds of populous, rich villages get wiped out from the map of Bangladesh every year due to this completely contrasting nature of the once mighty Teesta River. This year, Bangladesh has suffered from the most devastating flood in the last ten years. More than three million people have been affected in at least sixteen districts of the country by the surging waters of Jamuna and Teesta rivers-- the two main distributors of Brahmaputra River that flows in India and Bangladesh. More than 15,000 homes have been washed away by devastating river erosions. According to Engineer Jahangir Kabir, Director General of Bangladesh Water Development Board, "There are three river systems in Bangladesh which are Ganges river system, Jamuna river system, and Meghna river system. 93 percent of the catchment area of these three river systems is situated outside Bangladesh." "Heavy rainfall during monsoon in the upstream catchment area of these river systems situated beyond the Bangladeshi border is actually the main reason behind this year's flooding," he adds. So, to look at what causes such devastating deluge we have to go outside the borders of Bangladesh. Before, 1987, Teesta was a river of prosperity. The River used to nourish the fertile plains of Bangladesh's northern districts with mineral rich alluvial silts. Chillmari river port of Kurigram district on Teesta was a booming centre of riverine trade and commerce. Then in 1987 when India diverted the upstream waters of Teesta River with Gojoldoba barrage to irrigate its agricultural lands during dry season, the situation started to deteriorate in Bangladesh. Due to this barrage situated only 70 kilometres from Dalia point in Nilphamary, now the river bed of the once mighty Teesta River turns into an arid desert plain during every dry season. And, during monsoon, when the Gojoldoba barrage has been opened to drain away the excess waters of Teesta, the rushing water overflows the dried up, sand covered riverbed resulting in distressing floods and erosion of huge land mass. Besides this, the Indian government has also built several dams across Teesta River to produce hydroelectricity. On the other hand, according to a 2016 report published by Assam Science Technology and Environment Council, destruction of forests, and growing human settlements in the hills have degraded the catchment area of Brahmapautra River, which is the 10th largest river in the world in terms of discharge of water. As a result, during monsoon when the catchment areas of Brahmaputra are showered with around 12,000 millimetres of rainfall, the river, which has already lost its depth due to sedimentation resulting from soil erosion, expands many folds in width, failing to hold the rush of water like the Teesta river and swallows villages and towns which again contribute to sedimentation of the river. The main brunt of such flooding affects the lower basin of these mighty river streams which are mostly located in Bangladesh. Thus, abnormally overwhelming monsoon floods in Bangladesh is the glaring example of how unplanned modification of natural resource can bring about deadly catastrophes for mankind. However, experts in Bangladesh have claimed that this year's flood is not as devastating as the one we had experienced in 1998 and 1988, in spite of the fact that in Jamalpur, on July 28, waters of Jamuna River flowed 121 centimetres above the danger mark level, whereas during the flood of 1988 it flowed 112 centimetres above the mark. "If flood water remains clogged for a long period of time then we can call it a devastating flood. The flood water is now receding. Some places of the country have been inundated but compared to 1998 and 1988, this inundation is not that significant," says Jahangir. However, the receding flood water is making way for new catastrophes which is no less dangerous than the inundation. Besides loss of property, waterborne and other skin diseases have turned into epidemics in the flood affected areas. Akkas Ali with his 3 children and wife are still living in their dinghy as his household has washed away by the flood and the plot of his shanty is still soft and muddy. "My wife and my youngest daughter have been suffering from diarrhoea for last three days. All my skin is covered with rashes and sores. I cannot even walk due to acute pain from my sores," says Akkas Ali, a small farmer living in Hatathpara village in Udakhali union under Fulchhari upazila of Gaibandha district. "We cannot go to the doctor as all the roads and bridges have been washed away. I do not have any money to rebuild my house", adds a hopeless Akkas. The aftermath of the flood has worsened due to scarce relief and rescue operations. A huge number of people in most of the affected districts have not been contacted by any government representative with relief. "Nobody has given us any relief. We have no food, no medicine and no home," says Golejan Bibi a villager of Hatathpara village. "You think members and the chairman of our union council will send relief for us? They will never come to us. They will steal all the relief goods for their own use," adds Akkas. However, according to data shown by The Directorate of Disaster Management Tk 55 million and 6,000 tonnes of rice were distributed so far among 3.1 million affected-people. But reflection of such appreciable activity can hardly be seen in the flood affected areas. "We do not want relief. We want a safe place to build our home. We want strong dykes around our village which will not be washed away every year," says Golejan Bibi. Millions of people like Akkas and Golejan Bibi are now homeless, ailing and starving in Bangladesh. As the floods have washed away their homes, food crops and fishing ponds, they will suffer more crises due to food shortage and loss of property. If immediate relief response cannot reach these destitute people, the consequence might result in famine or further breaking out of diseases. However, to reach a sustainable solution to this regular catastrophe, there is no alternative to reach a bilateral consensus between Bangladesh and India to make an acceptable division of the waters of the two country's common rivers that has remained a pending issue for more than thirty years. Without solving this issue, there is no doubt that tragedies like this will descend upon the impoverished people of Bangladesh with greater extent of humanitarian disaster in the near future. @#

---------------

dates: ['2017-03-27']
datePublished: 2017-04-19 00:00:00
Date Published:2017-04-19 00:00:00 Ashik Miah, a 45-year-old farmer of Jaladhartupi village, was staring helplessly at his inundated paddy field as he sat beside Dekhar Haor at Dakshin Sunamganj upazila. "I cultivated Boro on around one hectare of land taking loans from a local lender. But the flash flood washed away all my investment. How will I repay the loan and where will I stand with my family now?" lamented Ashik. He was talking about his miseries when he threw a desperate glance at this correspondent and asked, "Who is responsible for the loss?" Like Ashik Miah, 70-year-old farmer Rashid Miah, Rahim Uddin, Abdul Khalik and many others of Sunamganj experienced the same fate. Most of them had borrowed money either from local lenders or from different non-government organisations. As they have lost their lone crop, their annual earning, the farmers can now see only a bleak future ahead. Some of them have tried in vain to harvest the underwater crops dipping into waist-deep water. Most of them eventually found that the water level was much deeper than what they had anticipated. Boro, the only crop of the haor areas in Sunamganj, has submerged due to untimely heavy rain followed by the flash flood that hit the areas on March 27, around 15 to 20 days before the harvest. Though the government has taken an initiative to implement several projects of re-sectioning submersible embankments and repairing the damaged ones through the Water Development Board (WDB), the contractors who got the work allegedly did not deliver. The farmers along with the Department of Agricultural Extension (DAE), local lawmakers and rights activists have blamed it on the WDB and the contractors, as the incomplete embankments could not save their Boro cultivation this year like the previous years. Locals said the disaster could be avoided or, at least, minimised by manifolds if the repair and construction of the embankments in the haor areas were completed in time. According to the WDB, two types of projects have been launched by the department to build and repair the embankments. This year, 76 projects have been taken up for re-sectioning of submersible embankments in different haors of Sunamganj, while another 238 projects were approved for as many Project Implementation Committees (PICs). Both types of projects were supposed to be completed by this February 28, but the WDB extended the date to March 31. More than 50 percent work of the PIC projects have been completed, while the projects under contractors were apparently in a mess as most of them did not even start the work and some others completed 30 to 50 percent. However, farmers, rights activists and locals claim neither the projects of contractors nor the PICs started their work in time and could barely complete 10 to 20 percent of the work. They also claim the high officials of the WDB's Sylhet and Sunamganj offices' corruption is another big reason behind this. According to DAE, 166,000 hectares of land was cultivated during this Boro season. Of the cultivated land, approximately 133,000 hectares of land submerged, causing huge loss to 250,000 farmers. However, the farmers in the haor areas claim they have lost the season's cultivation. Jahedul Haque, deputy director of DAE Sunamganj, told The Daily Star that the work of the embankments needed to be completed before March, but neglect by the WDB and the contractors caused the massive damage to the only Boro cultivation of the year. Mouazzam Hossain Ratan, lawmaker of Sunamganj-1 constituency, told The Daily Star that local contractors backed by political leaders were responsible for the farmers' miseries. The MP alleged that Khairul Huda Chapal, president of Sunamganj district unit Juba League, president of Sunamganj Chamber of Commerce and Industries and brother of Sunamganj Zilla Parishad Chairman Nurul Huda Mukut, Sajib Ranjan Das, vice-president of Sunamganj Chamber, and some other local contractors along with a section of WDB officials are mainly responsible for everything. He added they have barely completed 10 percent of their designated work. "I myself am a son of a farmer. I know the farmers will suffer for next three years as they have lost their only crop because of the neglect by the contractors and the Water Development Board officials," the lawmaker said, adding, "They do not work but always get the money from the projects." He also alleged that local contractors have created a syndicate in connivance with the contractors from outside and had the contracts taken by the outsiders by sharing the benefits. Contacted, Sajib Ranjan Das, contractor of nine projects of building embankments 89.09 kilometres in length, said he had completed around 50 percent of his work before the flash flood hit the haor areas. Denying the allegations, he said the WDB had delayed in handing over some project areas. Khairul Huda Chapal, contractor of three projects, said the PICs were mainly responsible for the loss and the project of re-sectioning of submersible embankment projects requires a long time. He added these projects mostly include new areas to build the embankments. Sanjay Roy Chowdhury, chairman of Jayashree Union Parishad under Dharmapasha upazila and president of a PIC, said the committee's work was not responsible for the flash flood as the river overflowed and the water went beyond the safety level of the embankments. Contacted, Abdul Hai, acting chief engineer of WDB, Sylhet, said the huge workload needed enough time for pre-procedure of the projects, but it had to be delayed for official reasons during evaluation and handing over the sites. He put the blame on natural calamities and said the embankments were supposed to be 6.5 metres in height, but this year the floodwater flowed over 8.1 metres. He admitted that some of the contractors and PICs could not start the work in time and most of them could not even complete the projects. Denying the allegation of corruption, he said the WDB is in no way related to any kind of graft and they barely gave 15 to 16 percent of the fund to some contractors and 50 to 55 percent to the PICs. He, however, said three committees have been formed by the ministry, board and the Anti-Corruption Commission to unearth corruption, if there is any. @#

---------------

