
Date Published:2009-01-25T00:00:00+06:00      
Breach in embankment of Teesta Irrigation Project damaged crops on about 6,000 acres of land in three villages of Kishoreganj upazila of the district yesterday.
Local sources said the embankment of Rangpur main canal of the irrigation project was damaged at Madhya Rajeeb Chengmari point of Kishoreganj upazila at around 6:00am.
Upazila agriculture office sources said Boro paddy, seedbeds, potato, tobacco, maize, mustard seeds were damaged due to onrush of water.
Kishoreganj Union Parishad Chairman A T M Anisur Rahman said several thousand farmers of Goda, Chengmari and Madhya Rajeeb villages have been affected and roads of those villages partially damaged.
Bangladesh Water Development Board (BWDB) sources said the breach in the embankment developed as some farmers illegally installed hollow plastic pipes to get water from the canal for irrigating their lands.
Farmers alleged though the canal is passing beside their agricultural lands, they have no way to get water legally.  Number of outlets through which the water of the canal comes out to their lands is inadequate, they said.
BWDB sources said they opened the gates of a regulator of the canal to reduce onrush of water.
They also closed the main gates of the canal at the upstream to prevent the water flowing through the canal.
Nural Islam, BWDB executive engineer of Nilphamari division, said they will repair the damaged portion of the embankment soon.
The newly elected Kishoreganj upazila chairman, upazila nirbahi officer and high officials of BDWB visited the spot and assured the affected farmers of all possible help.

---------------------

Date Published:2009-02-25T00:00:00+06:00      
Crops on about 50 acres of land washed away following collapse of a Bangladesh Water Development Board (BWDB) embankment at Sondaha point in Bera upazila yesterday morning, officials said.
Crack in dam due to invasion of rats might be the reason of its collapse, said BWDB Sub-Divisional engineer Md Nurul Akter.  BWDB has taken initiatives to repair the dam on urgent basis, he said. BWDB workers are working round the clock for resumption of supply of water to the irrigation project, he added.
However, locals claimed that fault in construction of the dam might be the reason of its collapse.   

---------------------

Date Published:2009-04-18T00:00:00+06:00      
   This Met office image made yesterday evening shows Bijli's path towards Bangladesh coast. Courtesy: Met Office Cyclone Bijli hit the coastal areas of Chittagong and Cox's Bazar last night.
Strong wind coupled with heavy rain started blowing at around 7:30pm. It may take another 4-6 hours to cross the coasts, said a late night Met office bulletin.
The storm lashed the offshore island of Sandwip, coastal upazilas of Banshkhali and Anowara in Chittagong and Chakoria,  Kutubdia and Moheshkhali islands in Cox's Bazar.
At around 10:00pm it was crossing the area with the maximum wind speed of 80 to 90 kmph (kilometre per hour).
In Chittagong city, maximum wind speed at Patenga was 70 to 80 kmph, said Additional Deputy Commissioner (Revenue) Zafar Alam from the district control room.
  "No casualty or damage has been reported till now. However, we have all preparedness to tackle any situation," he told The Daily Star.
Earlier, the government evacuated people from 11 coastal districts apprehending human casualties.
According to the bulletin, the maritime ports of Chittagong and Cox's Bazar have been advised to keep hoisted danger signal no 7 and 6.
The storm is likely to move in a north or north-easterly direction and weaken gradually, said the bulletin.
Under the influence of the storm, waves up to six to eight feet higher than usual were buffeting the shore. Operations of Chittagong and Mongla ports were suspended following the warning signals, including goods handling activities at all jetties. Chittagong and Cox's Bazar airports remained closed.
Reports received from our correspondents in coastal districts including Cox's Bazar, Chittagong, Noakhali, Feni, Laxmipur, and Bhola said it was drizzling almost all through the day and the sea was very rough. But the details of damages caused by the storm could not be ascertained till filing of this report at 11:00pm last night.
The local administrations took precautionary preparations and cautioned people through megaphones. Trained volunteers of the government's Cyclone Preparedness Programme and the Red Crescent evacuated people from the coastal areas, said administration sources.
The coastal districts of Patuakhali, Barguna, Pirojpur, Jhalakathi, Bagerhat, Khulna, Satkhira, and their offshore islands and chars were under danger signal number five. There was no report of damage or casualties available late last night.
However, the maritime port of Mongla has been asked to keep hoisted danger signal no 5 till further notice.
Our Chittagong office added that all-out preparations were taken there as the meteorological department asked to hoist maritime signal number seven for the district.
To rehabilitate the people of the coastal areas there are 457 cyclone shelters in the district, 56 of which are in the city, the administration sources added.
Meanwhile, Chittagong Port Authority and Chittagong City Corporation set up a number of control rooms in the city.
Our correspondent from Cox's Bazar reported that the sea was rough while the water level rose seven to eight feet higher than the normal tidal water level. Lower parts of the coast were inundated due to the very high tide.
The weather remained gloomy and it was drizzling all day in Cox's Bazar coastal areas. Stormy wind blew over different parts of Teknaf, Maheshkhali, and Kutubdia.
The weather was drizzly in Khulna, Bagerhat, Barguna, Barisal, Gopalganj, Patuakhali, Jhalakathi, Noakhali and Chandpur all through yesterday, our correspondents reported.

---------------------

Date Published:2009-05-01T00:00:00+06:00      
At least 2180 hectares of land and 6 kilometers of roads may face river erosion along the Jamuna, the Ganga and the Padma rivers during the monsoon this year, Centre for Environmental and Geographic Information Services (CEGIS) said yesterday.
Flood embankment may be breached at seven locations along the bank of the Jamuna, while 165 kilometers bank of the three major rivers of the country are vulnerable to erosion this year, it said.
Dr Maminul Haque Sarker, head of Morphology Division, CEGIS, revealed the information at a dissemination seminar on 'Riverbank Erosion Prediction 2009' organised jointly by GEGIS and Bangladesh Water Development Bank (BWDB) at Spectra Convention Centre in the city.
The prediction was made when around 6000 hectares of floodplain land is eroded along the main rivers annually, leaving thousands of people homeless and damaging infrastructures.
"Twenty three educational institutions, four market places, two government offices and two healthcare centres may also be eroded," Dr Maminul Haque said.
According to the prediction report, the areas where land, embankments and roads along the Jamuna are vulnerable to erosion are Kurigram Sadar, Ulipur, Chilmari, Raumari and Char Rajibpur in Kurigram, Fulchhari and Saghatta in Gaibandha, Sariakandi and Dhunat in Bogra, Kazipur, Sirajganj Sadar, Shahjadpur and Chauhali in Sirajganj, Bera in Pabna, Dewanganj, Islampur and Sarishabari in Jamalpur, Nagarpur in Tangail and Daulatpur in Manikganj.
The upazilas vulnerable to erosion along the Ganges include Nawabganj Sadar, Paba and Bagha in Rajshahi, Daulatpur, Bheramara, Kushtia Sadar and Kumarkhali in Kushtia, Pabna Sadar in Pabna and Pangsha and Rajbari Sadar in Rajbari district.
There are erosion-vulnerable lands and infrastructures in Faridpur Sadar and Char Bhadrasan in Faridpur, Zanjira and Bhedarganj in Shariatpur, Nawabganj and Dohar in Dhaka and Tongibari in Munshiganj along the river Padma this year.
Speaking as the chief guest, Water Resources Minister Ramesh Chandra Sen said making river erosion prediction by CEGIS is a great initiative and the government can maintain the embankments to protect localities and people before the monsoon.
"River erosion causes losses to hundreds of crores of taka. If we can dredge rivers and maintain embankments, we can save huge money and lessen the sufferings of people," he said.
Dredging rivers will not only ensure normal flow of rivers, but also help farm irrigation, the minister said, adding that his ministry should be allocated enough funds for such activities.
Water experts at the seminar said people lose their land due to river erosion, but the government does not take measures to compensate them, though it compensates the people when they lose their houses.
The people who become landless due to river erosion should be included in the safety-net programmes like VGF and VGD.
CEGIS Executive Director Giasuddin Ahmed Chowdhury, Water Resources Secretary SM Wahid-uz-Zaman and Water Development Board Director General Abdul Kalam Mohammad Azad also spoke.

---------------------

Date Published:2009-05-10T00:00:00+06:00      
   Photo: Tanvir Ahmed / Driknews Bangladesh has three great rivers the Brahmaputra, the Padma and the Meghna around 230 smaller rivers flow into these. As there are so many people living in the country, they have to use every bit of land available for farming, even the riverbanks. These riverbanks are prone to erosion and people frequently plunge into extreme poverty when they lose their land and homes due to erosion. Although floods are an annual event, huge floods seem to be becoming more frequent. In 2004, a deluge destroyed 80% of the country's crops, killed 747 people and left 30 million homeless or stranded. The floods of 2007 were not as severe but caused far greater health problems such as cholera and diarrhoea than has been seen for at least a decade. Temperature increase caused by climate change will mean that more snow will melt in the Himalayas each summer. This water will run into the rivers increasing the chances of flooding and river erosion. If the snow melts fully, it could lead to severe water shortage.
The country could also receive 14% more rainfall by 2028, meaning more land will be flooded. Many of those living in coastal areas will have to move inland where the population is already high. Increased sea levels mean that salt is getting into the soil, making fields near the coast useless for farming. The salt is also killing off mangrove forests that are a vital protection against cyclones, storms and tsunamis. Climate change could also increase the number and intensity of tropical storms in the area.
Predictions suggest that climate change could mean that by 2050, 15 million people may be made environmental refugees in Bangladesh. Comprehensive flood control and emergency measures must be taken immediately.

---------------------

Date Published:2009-05-19T00:00:00+06:00      
Erosion by hilly river Someshwary in bordering Durgapur upazila under the district has taken a serious turn due to heavy rain and rolling down of water from the upstream in India.
During the last few days, the river has devoured at least 200 dwelling houses and about 500 acres of cultivated land.
Around 800 people, rendered homeless by the erosion, have taken refuge in the nearby flood shelters or other villages.
During a visit to the areas, this correspondent saw devouring of a vast tract of land of Dakumara, Ranikong and Shibganj villages in Durgapur upazila by the Someshwary. Local people tried to resist erosion by dumping sandbags, bamboos and timbers but strong current of the river foiled their attempt.
Serious erosion by the river in the rainy season has become a yearly affair.
In last three years, the river has devoured most areas of Khamarkhali Bazar and Shibganj Bazar.
Over four hundred families used to live at village Dakumara four years ago. But the river Someshwary engulfed 500 acres of land leaving 250 families landless and homeless.
In last three years three kilometres of the five-kilometre Shibganj-Ranikong road in Durgapur upazila, the only link road between Durgapur upazila headquarters and bordering villages of Durgapur, went into the Someshwary river.
Local people told this correspondent that they repeatedly urged the authorities concerned to construct a four-kilometre protection embankment from Gaokandia to Ranikong along the Someshwary River but to no effect.
When contacted, Mohammad Didarul Alam, executive engineer of Bangladesh Water Development Board, Netrakona, said, "A Tk 62 lakh project for construction of 160-metre protection embankment on the Someshwary River has started at Shibganj and it will complete next year. The four-kilometre protection embankment will have to be made in stages."
Locals, however, said construction work of the 160-metre embankment stopped shortly after its start. Besides, the said protection embankment will have very little to do to prevent floods from around four kilometre areas along the river, they said.
They have urged the authorities concerned to take necessary action immediately.

---------------------

Date Published:2009-05-26T00:00:00+06:00      
   Tidal waves batter the Patenga beach in Chittagong City yesterday destroying makeshift shops on the shore as cyclone Aila makes landfall. Scores of people were reported missing.Photo: Zobaer Hossain Sikder Cyclone Aila hit the country's south-western coast yesterday afternoon, killing at least 18 people and washing away several thousand homes, as wind-driven tidal surge inundated vast tracts of land.
Four people in Bhola, three each in Khulna, Patuakhali, Noakhali, Laxmipur, one in Barguna and a child in Barisal died, while a few hundred thousand people were marooned in the affected areas.
Over 500 people were reported missing, mostly fishermen who were yet to return from the sea.
In the Indian state of West Bengal, at least 19 people died as Aila lashed Kolkata and five adjoining districts. The cyclone affected around one lakh people in West Bengal and paralysed normal life, reports our correspondent Pallab Bhattacharya from India.
Packing winds of up to 90km an hour, the storm roared into Khulna, Satkhira, Patuakhali, Bagerhat, Barisal, Barguna, Pirojpur, Jhalakathi, Laxmipur, Jessore and Bhola around 2:00pm yesterday.
Thousands of people were made homeless as tidal waves leaping up to 13 feet high rolled onto those coastal districts. The waves damaged river and flood-control embankments and dykes, submerging many villages in Khulna, Satkhira, Patuakhali and Barisal.
A large number of domestic animals and standing crops on farmland were lost in the surge.
Food and Disaster Management Minister Abdur Razzak officially confirmed five deaths in Bhola and Patuakhali.
Speaking at a hurriedly called press briefing at his ministry, he however could not give more details on casualties and losses as Bangladesh Navy and Coastguard ships could not go to the offshore islands from Chittagong due to the turbulent sea, reports UNB.
Heavy rain raised water level of rivers submerging thousands of thatched houses and shanties while strong wind uprooted trees and toppled houses. Many unions went under knee- to waist-deep water.
River communications between the capital and all southern districts remained cut off since yesterday morning. Power supply to those districts also snapped in the evening.
Ferry service between Paturia and Daulatdia was suspended around 3:00pm, while that in Mawa has already been put on hold since Sunday evening.
Local administration of districts and upazilas in the coastal belt had started evacuating people to safer places and many took shelter at cyclone shelters, schools and colleges before Aila made landfall.
The Met office has asked Mongla Port to hoist Danger Signal-7.
Bhola, Barisal, Patuakhali, Barguna, Pirojpur, Jhalakathi, Bagerhat, Khulna, Satkhira, Jessore and their offshore islands and chars will be under this signal, read a special Met office bulletin issued in the evening.
It, however, advised Chittagong and Cox's Bazar ports to hoist Danger Signal-6.
In Dhaka and elsewhere in the country, there were strong wind and heavy rainfall since yesterday morning.
Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina yesterday instructed her ministers to take necessary steps, from their respective positions, for helping the Aila affected.
At a cabinet meeting yesterday afternoon, she ordered members of the armed forces to join in the relief and rescue operations.
Our correspondent in Satkhira reports: Around one lakh people of 95 villages of Shyamnagar and Ashashuni upazilas became marooned as flood-protection embankments gave away in at least 25 places.
Over 100 people were reported missing in the district.
Flood-protection dykes on the Kabodak, Khalpetua, Madar, Chulkuri and Kalia breached and swamped a number of villages. Many villages near the Sundarbans went under water as well.
A large number of people have taken shelter at different cyclone centres, schools and madrasas.
Some rivers of the district were flowing eight to 13 feet higher than their usual levels.
Deputy Commissioner (DC) Abdus Samad said a 33-member team of Bangladesh Navy has left for the cyclone-hit areas to conduct rescue operations. The team was facing difficulties due to the adverse weather.
Red Crescent has also gone in with water purifying tablets and other relief materials. The DC has allocated 10 tonnes of rice and Tk 1 lakh for immediate relief.
Our correspondent in Barisal reports: Aila snapped road and river communications in the district since Sunday night. Rivers, their estuaries and confluences became very rough.
High tides in rivers inundated many areas of the district causing considerable damage to properties. Strong wind also brought down houses and trees. The storm destroyed livestock and crops as well.
Rabbi, 7, of Char Laxmi Bardhan, drowned, said UNO of Bakerganj upazila.
In Bhola, the dead were identified as Harun, 27, and Giasuddin, 30, of Bhola Sadar, Nazim, 18, of Charfashion, Rozina, 4, of Manpura.
Crops on 25,000 acres of land were damaged, the UNO claimed.
Our staff correspondent in Khulna reports: Aila struck Khulna city and Bagerhat around 2:30pm with wind speed of up to 90kmph.
Three people died in Batiaghata and Koira upazilas while over one lakh people got marooned in the districts. Of the three dead, one was identified as Kuntal Biswas, 65, of Jileghata village of Batiaghata upazila.
Over one lakh people of Dacope and Koira upazilas in Khulna and Mongla, Sharankhola and Morrelganj upazilas of Bagerhat were moved to cyclone shelters or safe places.
Five ships were moved to the safety of the outer anchorage of Mongla Port.
Upazila Nirbahi Officer (UNO) Kazi Atiur Rahman of Dacope said six out of nine unions went under waist-deep water. Over 50,000 people were rendered homeless in the upazila.
Disaster control rooms have been opened up in upazilas of Khulna and Bagerhat where volunteers, officials of some non-government organisations and officials of Relief and Rehabilitation Department have been kept on standby to deal with the aftermath, said the deputy commissioners of the two districts.
Our correspondent in Patuakhali reports: Huge areas of Patuakhali and Barguna went under eight to 10 feet of seawater.
Three people died in the storm in Patuakhali alone and another one in Barguna.
Of the dead in Patuakhali, Afzal Mollik, 60, of Bawfal upazila and two-year-old Sumaiya were identified.
Several kilometres of flood-control embankments in Golachipa, Kalapara and Patuakhali Sadar was washed away by the tidal surge.
Kuakata remained cut off from the rest of the country as three ferry terminals on Kalapara-Kuakata Highway got submerged.
In Nijhum Dwip in Hatia of Noakhali, Nazma Begum, 10, drowned and in Keringchar two other children died when a wall collapsed on them, reported private TV channel Desh TV.
The channel claimed that three, including two children, died in Chargajaria of Laxmipur.
Our Cox's Bazar correspondent reports: Twenty-one fishing trawlers went missing with 400 fishermen onboard.
Around 25-km-long embankment in Moheshkhali was damaged and about 800 shrimp enclosures were washed away in the tidal surge.
Acting Mayor of Cox's Bazar Municipality Sarwar Kamal said around 2,000 houses were flooded by the tidal waves.
Meanwhile, the ongoing HSC and equivalent examinations in Aila affected areas have been postponed.
A government handout last night said the HSC examinations scheduled for Tuesday in cyclone-affected areas would be held later on.
It said deputy commissioners of affected districts in consultation with the respective education boards would decide where examinations would not be held.
In Kolkata, incessant rain accompanied by strong wind, with speed reaching 100-120kmph, hit the metropolis and all flights at the Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose International Airport were suspended from 2:00pm, official sources said.
Chief Minister of West Bengal Buddhadeb Bhattacharya said he alerted the Indian army while the Border Security Force and police have begun rescue operations in the Sundarbans and South 24 Parganas district where hundreds of mud-built houses collapsed.
The army was moving into Sandeshkhali and Hingalganj in North 24 Parganas and at Sagar Dwip, Gosaba and Patharpratima in South 24 Parganas.

---------------------

Date Published:2009-05-28T00:00:00+06:00      
   Hungry and homeless people throng a boat carrying the army bringing relief materials to Khelpetua village under Gabura Union in Khulna district yesterday, two days after Cyclone Aila hit the coastal areas.Photo: STAR An acute shortage of food and safe drinking water scourges the south-western districts hit by Cyclone Aila, which has left at least 155 people killed and scores missing.
Two days after the Monday's storm, thousands of people were still marooned in remote areas.
Starving and desolate, they were waiting for the government and non-government volunteers carrying out relief efforts with the help of the armed forces.
Meanwhile, Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina last night directed the ministers concerned to step up measurers to help the Aila victims. She also asked them to take immediate steps to repair the embankments and other infrastructures left battered by the cyclone.
Earlier in the day, Food and Disaster Management Minister Abdur Razzaque said the government volunteers are distributing food and other essentials throughout the coastal districts. Helicopters are being used to send relief materials to faraway places.
People have been facing water crisis as saline water inundated their areas, he said in a press conference at the ministry. So, the government has been distributing drinking water along with foods and medicines.
At least 13 water purifying plants have been set up in the affected areas, the minister said. So far, around 10,000 tonnes of rice and Tk 2.23 crore in cash have been dispatched.
Aila victims, however, give a different picture.
"Almost all people in our union have been affected by the cyclone, but we have yet to see any relief materials," said Mazharul Islam Nani of Golbunis in Golachipa upazila of Patuakhali.
The district administration distributed 155 tonnes of rice and Tk 1.55 lakh among the victims in seven upazilas, but the amount appeared to be inadequate.
Two more bodies were recovered in the district yesterday. The deceased were identified as Roman, 13, of Balaibunia under Golachipa upazila and Kadbhanu, 45, of Pangashia in Dumki upazila.
Our correspondent in Satkhira reports: Thousands of people remain marooned in Gabura, Padmapukur, Burigoalini, Munshiganj and Kaikhali unions of Shyamnagar upazila and some places in Assassuni and Tala upazilas. They are struggling with little or no food and drinking water.
"These are hard days. We cannot cook food since there is no high ground to place the stove or any fuel to light it up," said Rohela Bibi of Gabura union.
Many people devastated by Aila were seen waiting on embankments in Satkhira for relief materials.
Our staff correspondent in Khulna reports: Over one lakh people in the district are struggling without food and water.
Chairmen of Koira, Paikgacha and Dacope upazila parishads said they fear outbreaks of waterborne diseases and famine as the water started receding Tuesday night.
Relief operations jointly carried out by the navy and the coastguard, in cooperation with government officials, were insufficient, alleged Dacope upazila parishad Chairman Abul Hossain, Koira upazila parishad Chairman Mohsin Reza and Paikgacha upazila parishad Chairman Rashiduzzaman.
Acute crisis of drinking water prevails in the storm-hit Mongla upazila of Bagerhat where the relief supplied was inadequate.
The port authorities yesterday started providing the destitute with drinking water, but that was not enough to meet the needs of a quarter of the people there, said Chairman of Mongla Upazila Parishad Iddris Ali.
Thousands in Sharankhola and Morrelganj upazilas of Bagerhat face similar crisis of food and drinking water.
Chairman of Soudkhali union Anwar Hossain Panchayet said relief distribution operations were not being carried out properly.
CASUALTIES
Of the total deaths in 17 districts, 35 were reported in Satkhira, 35 in Khulna, 26 in Noakhali, 18 in Bhola, nine in Patuakhali, six in Laxmipur, nine in Barisal, four in Narsingdi, two each in Bagerhat, Chapainawabganj, Naogaon and Cox's Bazar, and one each in Natore, Dhaka (Keraniganj), Magura, Rangpur and Lalmonirhat, reported UNB.
According to official figures, the death toll stood at 113 and the number of injured 6,478.
The body count could rise as rescuers and locals are still spotting bodies.
THE DESTRUCTION
According to the food and disaster management ministry's primary assessment, crops on 80,667 acres of land were destroyed and those on 3,09,327 acres were damaged partly.
A total of 33,44,309 people of 588 unions under 76 upazilas were affected by the cyclone. Of the roads, 641.8 km were destroyed and 3,231 km damaged.
A total of 341 institutions were flattened and 1,596 damaged. At least 152 culverts and 813.1 km of embankments were also damaged.
Around 61,440 domestic animals were killed.
"The government decided to repair all the embankments washed away or damaged," said Food Minister Abdur Razzaque who visited Patuakhali yesterday.
Our staff correspondent from Khulna reported that Aila damaged over 18,000 shrimp enclosures in Bagerhat destroying shrimps worth Tk 40 crore. It has also damaged over 7,000 fish farms in the district.
At least 20,297 homes were also damaged.
RESCUE AND RELIEF OPERATIONS
Bangladesh Air Force helicopters transported relief goods and water purification plants to Shyamnagar of Satkhira, Barguna sadar, Kuakata, Patuakhali sadar, Dhalchar and Daulatkhan of Bhola.
Bangladesh Army continued its rescue and relief operations in remote areas of Patuakhali, Satkhira, Khulna and Bagerhat in cooperation with the local administration.
Army medical teams are also providing medical care, says an ISPR press release.
Deputy commissioners, upazila nirbahi officers, and upazila chairmen are also engaged in rescue and relief operations.
The food minister and LGRD Minister Syed Ashraful Islam yesterday visited Barguna and Kuakata, while State Minister for LGRD Jahangir Kabir Nanak visited Kalapara upazila of Patuakhali and Maj Gen Motiur Rahman, GOC of Jessore Cantonment, visited Mirzaganj upazila of Patuakhali and distributed relief materials.
Meanwhile, Brac from its own fund approved Tk 1 crore for the Aila-affected people. It already started distributing food, drinking water and water purifying tablets.
Bangladesh Red Crescent Society is continuing its rescue and relief operations in Aila-affected areas, says a press release.
It already donated Tk 3,60,000 among 8,000 affected families.
It also distributed 16,000 plastic sheets, 16,000 saris, 16,000 lungis, 8,000 jerry canes, 800 tents, 1,60,000 water purification tablets, 80,000 oral saline packs, 16,000 blankets, 8,000 hygiene kits and 16,000 clothes in the affected areas.
Meanwhile, in an emergency meeting of the Awami League (AL) Presidium, Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina directed ministers concerned to take all out measurers for rehabilitating the cyclone-affected people.
The meeting was held at her official residence Jamuna with Hasina in the chair.
Finance Minister AMA Muhith, Food and Disaster Management Minister Abdur Razzaque were also present at the meeting.
The prime minister directed the finance minister to clear necessary funds, which would be needed for the rehabilitation of Aila victims, AL Office Secretary Abdul Mannan Khan told reporters after the meeting.
He said the water resources ministry has already mentioned that around Tk 200 crore would be needed to repair the embankments.
Hasina also directed party leaders to stand beside the cyclone victims.
Talking to The Daily Star, the food and disaster management minister said many countries and donor agencies including USA, World Bank, UNDP and the European Union have offered assistance for the cyclone victims.
Welcoming the foreign assistance, the minister said the government has adequate food and money to rehabilitate the cyclone victims.

---------------------

Date Published:2009-06-01T00:00:00+06:00      
Cyclone Aila victim 65-year old Omar Ali's wait for fresh clothing ended in vain as he died of diarrhoea in Chandnimukho village in Shyamnagar in the early hours yesterday.
Bangladesh Red Crescent Society on Saturday enlisted his name and gave him a non-food item relief card.
"He was very happy to get the card as he was wearing a lungi for the last three days," wailed his daughter Halima Khatun.
"My father died within one hour of being attacked by diarrhoea," she said.
Diarrhoea is spreading fast in the cyclone-hit areas due to lack of safe drinking water. Every day a few hundred people are being affected in the cyclone-hit areas and three have died so far in Shyamnagar.
The residents of Gabura, Padmapukur, Burigowalini and Munshiganj are suffering from acute crisis of drinking water.
Water distributed by the government and many non-government organisations is not enough to meet the demand of the affected people since all the drinking water sources were inundated in the storm surge.
District Civil Surgeon Dr Mohammad Ebadullah said around 600-700 people are attacked with diarrhoea and other water-borne diseases.
He added 37 medical teams are working in the areas to combat diarrhoea outbreak.

---------------------

Date Published:2009-06-06T00:00:00+06:00      
   Waiting for water.Photo: AFP BANGLADESH, during the last few decades, has been identified as a disaster prone area. It has been barely 16 months since the killer Sidr struck the coastline of Bangladesh and took a toll of 3,500 lives, according to official count, with huge loss of property and livestock.
Cyclone Aila, that hit the south western coast of Bangladesh on May 25, left a trail of devastation, killing at least 175 people, with several hundreds missing and several thousands injured, according to official count. The tidal surge that accompanied the cyclone caused widespread damage, affecting the lives and livelihood of about 33 lakh people, as revealed by an official handout of the Disaster Management Bureau.
The damage caused in Shyamnagore and Assasuni upazila under Satkhira district is extensive. People in these places don't have any houses, water or sanitation facilities. In the words of Anwara Begum of Dumuria villge under Gabura union: "This is a living hell." The air there is heavy with the stench of decomposed livestock washed away by the surging water from the rivers linked to the sea. The direst need in these places is drinking water.
Officials cannot get food and medicines across to the needy. Relief experts have an adage: "For the survivors of the natural disaster, a second man-made disaster may be looming." Given Bangladesh's dismal record in calamity management, it usually holds good. But with the government tackling the situation, this can be a different story.
With committed officials and a host of well meaning individuals and institutions, there can be a change in the lives of the shattered people. Unhappily, even seven days after the calamity, relief is meagre, food is scarce and government officials are conspicuous by their absence on the plea that disaster-hit areas are inaccessible.
Paradoxically true, most tragedies have no end, just a beginning. Equally true, most tragedies expose the bureaucratic bungling and political callousness that heighten the crisis. Octogenarian Golman Bibi of Bir Laxmi village and housewife Farida Khatun of Uttar Atulia, taking shelter on raised land, lament in desperation not for food but for a bottle of drinking water and a packet of Orsaline to save Farida's diarrhea affected daughter. For the people of Shyamnagore, it's a double-whammy. They not only faced the brunt of nature's fury, but have to suffer government apathy as well.
The government's task after the calamity is enormous. Confronted by an army of NGOs all offering to help, the problem before the government is efficient utilisation. The reports of the sufferings of the battered people, heightened by the scarcity of drinking water, coming in everyday seem almost too horrific to be true. But they are.
As reported by WDB officials, about 1430 sq km of embankments have been breached and, in Bhetkhali, Gabura, Jogindranagore and Protapnagore bordering the rivers linked with the sea, about 109 sq km of embankments have been totally washed away by the tidal surge, allowing intrusion of salt water over vast areas that will remain submerged unless the embankments are either built afresh or repaired.
Because of the submergence of land and ponds in salty water that continues to inundate the land bordering these rivers, drinking water will be hard to find.
It seems impossible for the government machinery to continue long-term relief, rescue and rehabilitation efforts. Even seven days after the tidal surge inundated Satkhira and Khulna, thousands are still without food, water, shelter or hope.
The key to combating a disaster of such proportions is speed, commitment and will, so that damage can be minimised and rescue, relief and rehabilitation is swift and effective. The government needs to appoint a disaster management coordinator from the civil administration or from the army to supervise the entire rehabilitation program.
A coordination centre must be set up, and placed in charge of the coordinator who will monitor all activities related to the repairing and building of embankments breached or washed away. One thing is certain. Proper utilisation of the money allocated for construction of the embankments is most important to avert future catastrophe.
One reason for the collapse of the embankments is the weak foundation of the embankments, caused by the plastic pipe pushed through the bed of the embankment for bringing in saline water from the river on the other side for the shrimp farms.
During my visit to Shyamnagore and Assasuni after the last Sidr disaster, I saw hundreds of such pipes. This must be stopped. The shrimp farm owners must be forced to pipe in saline water only through the sluice gates. Sure enough, the damage these areas suffered that time was trivial compared to what has happened this time.
If the administration or WDB fails to put the embankments in place at the earliest, no solution will work and there will be hundreds and thousands of Aila refugees who will have no other option but to migrate to high lands, preferably the district town Satkhira, for food and living.
The drinking water problem will haunt the cyclone victims for a long time. With advanced communication and warning systems available these days, Bangladesh can't fail miserably in its response to such events.
We might recall that after the tsunami in 2004 in the coast of Tamil Nadu, its drinking water sources were polluted with excessive salt-water intrusion because of tidal surge. Responding to a call from the Tamil Nadu administration, Tata Projects Limited installed a desalination mobile van that could produce 3,500 litres of potable water per hour. The plant is still in operation now. The disaster management bureau should install such "kits" in coastal zones, operated by diesel engine.
In exceptional times, exceptional solutions have to be found. The real test of nations, governments and peoples is how they react to crises. If the availability of fresh water is endangered due to natural disasters, the government should employ the desalination process followed in the Gulf States and Saudi Arabia.
In the distillation-based desalination plants in the Gulf states, salty water is heated to produce vapour, which is then condensed to produce fresh potable water. But this could be a costly venture for Bangladesh because it uses a huge amount of electricity.
The second way is the reverse osmosis process -- which is more flexible than distillation and often cheaper. Engineers at the California Metropolitan Water District (MWD), in collaboration with others, have come out with an economic breakthrough by designing a plant that uses aluminum instead of titanium and concrete instead of steel to keep construction costs down. These plants turn out water for less than 50 cents a cubic metre, with production capacity of 75m l/d.
With the region extending from Satkhira to Teknaf coming under the grip of salty water because of the frequency of natural hazards like cyclone and  hurricane accompanied by tidal surge, the government is left with no other option but to go for desalination plants in these places to meet the cataclysmic situation resulting from such recurrent nightmares that seem to haunt the coastal population these days.Md. Asadullah Khan is a former teacher of physics and Controller of Examinations, BUET. aukhanbd@gmail.com. 

---------------------
